https://ch.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matematika

Matematika (mafana'an Matematikas pat Math lokkue') i siensan i idean kantidat,
estruktura, kampo, yan tinilaika; kontodu i raman eskuela ni ha estudia
håftaimanu umachetton todus siha na idea. I taotao ni ha estudia Matematika
mafana'an Matematiku.

Guåha na sinangan "i rainan siensa" i Matematika, lao guåha lokkue' taotao ni ti
ma konsidera i Matematika un siensa naturåt. Prinipåtmente, i matematiku siha ma
difina ya ma analisa idean-ñiha para mas ma tungo' i idea—para i adelanton
matematika ha'. Malago'-ñiha tumungo' hafa siña ma sangan an guåha estruktura.
Pot i hemplu, kao guåha nai siña siha mamprueba gi henerat? Meggai lokkue' na
matematiku siha mas ma konsidera i matematika kalan åtte embes di siensa
aplikao. Sinembåtgo, humuyongña siensa naturåt meggai na estruktura ni ma
analisa i matimatiko siha, ya achokka' ti manaligao siha aplikasion, guåha na
biåhi ni ma sodda' aplikasion, meggai na biåhi gi fisika.

Siña ha' mafana'an matemaika i siensan "numiru yan simbolo." Kumekeilek-ña na i
analisan estruktura henerat ni madifina ginen axiom nina'i siha, manu'usa lohika
yan simbolon matematika. I siensan ophetu yan estudiun inachetton-ñiha. Solo ma
usa i sinahguan estruktura para kedanchiyi infotmatsion.

Makonsidera matematika un lengguahe lokkue'. Siña ha' makonsidera matematika un
ekstension lengguahen taotao, ni ha usa un gramatika yan bokabulariu ni madifina
gof espisifiku. Ya i minito'-ña ineksplika yan inaligao i inachetton hinasso yan
fisika ni fino'-ña.



https://ch.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gu%C3%A5h%C3%A5n

Gaige islan Guåhån (Engles: Guam) gi mås yahåyaya gi kadenan Marianas ya guiya
mås dångkolu entre todu i isla yan úniku minantietieni ni Estados Unidos desde
1898 na sakkan. Mafa'nana'an i isla "Tollai Amerika asta guatu Asia" sa' put i
minåolek pusisión-ña gi yeogråfiku yan ekonomia. Ma tatáncho' este na isla kåsi
9700 (nuebi mit siete sientos) kilumetro gi ge'lichan San Francisco, 6000 (sais
mit) kilumetro ge'lichan låo sumanhaya patte gi ya Honolulu, 2400 (dos mit
kuatro sientos) kilumetro gi hayan i kattan Tokyo, 3400 (tres mit kuatro
sientos) kilumetro kattan sanhayan Hong Kong yan 2400 (dos mit kuatro sientos)
kilumetro gi kattan Manila.

Manestaba esta i manChamorru gi islan Guåhån antes di manhalom i Españót gi 1600
na siklo despues di finatton Fetnando Magallanes. Annok gi manatatte na
infotmasión na kasse siña' mås di tres mit kinientos maloffan na tiempo na
manggaige i manChamorru gi kadenan Mariånas låo ti ma tungo' amanu na gaige i
hale'-ñiha pat tinituhon-ñiha este na rasa.



https://ch.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indonesia

Indonesia i tano' gi Hayan na Kattan Asia ya guiya mas dangkolo' na tano entre
todu gi Hayan na Kattan Asia. Ma tata'chong este na tano' entalo Tasen India yan
Tasen Pasifiku. Indonesai guaha tano' giya 1,919,440 kilometro kuadrao pat
741,096.53 miyas kuadrao. Yakatta i kabisera na siudat gi Indonesia na guaha
poblasion siha 12 miyones taotao.

Indonesia ma tata'chong gi Talo, ma'ipe i klima siha sanhalom entiru na sakkan
pat tiempo. Klima gi Indonesia fa'klase ginen halom tano' asta tano' cha'guan
ha.

Todu poblasion gi Indonesia guaha 224,784,210 taotao gi sakkan 2000. Indo-Malay,
i taotao natibu gi Indonesia(94%), Chino(4%), Taotao Papuano(1.2%) yan Indiano,
Arabo, Europeano, madaña na taotao yan otro na taotao(0.8%)

Bahasa Indonesia solamente ofisiat na lengguahe gi Indonesia ya guaha 726
lengguahe ha' gi Indonesia.

Relihon giya Indonesia: Muslim(80%), Kristiano(13%), Hindu(1.90%), Relihon
Etniko(1%), Konfusianismo(0.5%), Buddhismo(0.3%) yan otros, dumaña
ateista(3.3%). I magahet, siempre kasi 76.5% pat 78% i relihon Muslim gi todu
poblasion Indonesiano.



https://ch.wikipedia.org/wiki/Islas_Mari%C3%A5nas

I Islas Mariånas un kadena ni manmafa'tinas ginen i puntan 15 na botkan, ya
manggaige gi halom i grupon isla siha ni ma'a'agang Micronesia.

I finene'na na taotaogues ni manmåtto para i Mariånas masåsångan na mangginen
Asia mågi na lugat. Siha fuma'tinas i acho' latte siha ni siña un li'e' gi islan
Tini'an, Luta, yan Guåhån.

I finene'na na taotao Uropa ni lumi'e' i Mariånas si Fetnando Magallanes gi dia
6 Matsu 1521. Ha ripara i dos mas yahayaya na isla gi grupo ya lumayak entre i
dos isla, pues ogan Guåhån. Ha diklara na islas España på'go i ha sodda' siha na
isla. Gi sumaga-ña Guåhån, si Magallanes yan i mangga'chong-ña marineru, ma
ayudan maisa siha nu i guinahan i tano' yan maseha håfa ni gaige gi uriya. Pues,
i taotao tåno' ma li'e' lokkue' håfa guinaha-ña si Magallanes ya ma ayudan maisa
siha lokkue' nai håfa gaige gi bapot-ñiha i manestrangheru. Lalålo' si
Magallanes annai ha tungo' este ya ha fa'na'an i islas "Las Islas de los
Ladrones" (I Islas Mansakke), lao gi sakkan 1668 matulaika i na'an para "Las
Marianas" gi onrun Mariana de Austria, bi'udan Felipe IV giya España.

I Ma’estudian i isla tinitihon as Commodore George Anson, taotao Englatera, ni
gi Agosto 1742 ogan gi islan Tini’an.

I Mariånas, lao mas espesifiku i islan Guåhån, ma’usa ni Españot komu
fansugo’-ñiha gi biahen-ñiha ginen Acapulco, Meksiku asta Manila, Filipinas.

Hapon, i membron Triple Entente, ha tutuhon humåtme i islas gi 1914. Annai
manmapetdi Alemaña yan i pumalu na Central Powers gi Primet na Geran i Mundo, i
hagas islas Alemaña manma’entrega ni League of Nations para i Hapones komu
mandate territory (ti parehu yan UN Trust Territory).



https://ch.wikipedia.org/wiki/Estorian_Chamoru

"Umestoria" un kostumbre ni ma'usa fama'na'gue, umeksplika, pat pot dibetsion.
Ti masasangan na anggen guåha estorian fama'na'gue ti siña ha estoria dibetsion
pat umeksplika. I mayot na estoria siha ma na'daña i tres na kategoria.

Guåha i kostumbren umestoria giya i Islas Mariånas ginen i eran åntes di
manmamatto i Gilagu siha, ya ha kontinuha asta på'gu. I mayot na estoria siha gi
fino'Chamoru, ginen i mañaina annai ma sangani i famagu'on-ñiha ni estoria.
Entonses, guåha leksion-ñiha gi finakpo' meggai na estoria siha (mafa'na'an
"ihemplo" lokkue'). Sinembatgo, fihu ma'usa i estoria siha muna'apmam i kuttura,
i hinengge, yan i kostumbre ginen i antigu na tiempo.

Unos kuantos na estorian Chamoru ma usa para fama'na'gue un leksion (un
ihemplo). Tenga, guåha un påtgon ni ti ha osge i saina-ña, ya entonses guåha na
binaba na humuyongña. Tatkomu, i estorian "Sirena". Si Sirena ti ha tungo'
manosge, pues i nana-ña ha kahnåyi gue', "Sottera un fama'guihan." Ya på'go, ti
siña si Sirena humoyong i tasi.

Guåha otru na klase estorian Chamoru ni ma usa para u fanoppe i finaisen
"Sahafa...?" Tatkomu, i estorian "Håfa Taimanu Mafa'tinas-ña i Taotao" pat
"Puntan Dos Amåntes." I fine'nena na estoria ha eksplika i fina'tinas i taotao
siha, mientras i mina'dos na estoria ha eksplika håfa taimanu ma fa'na'an i
sitio "Puntan Dos Amåntes."

Guåha lokkue' estorian dibetsion gi kostumbren umestoria. Tatkomu i estorian
"Halu'u" pat "Gadao" ni guåha hemplon minatatngan yan minetgot i taotao siha.



https://ch.wikipedia.org/wiki/S%C3%A5kkan

Såkkan (pat åñu ginen fino'Españot) gi henerat fa'na'an i tiempo entre dos na
susiadet ni umachetton yan i chalan-ña ni ha dibuetta gi atdao. Kumekeilek-ña
lokkue' i tiempon tåtme pat i tiempon kosecha.

Såkkan kalendario (åñu kalendario) kumekeilek-ña i tiempo entre dos na fecha ni
mamarehu nå'an-ñiha.

Åñu feskat kumekeilek-ña i dose na mes siha ni ma'usa para u tåha i kuentan
bisnis pat otganisasion kada såkkan. Manafuetsao i bisnis siha manmafa'tinas
enao na inanokcha kada na 12 mes siha, lao ti afuetsao i åñu feskat tumutuhon gi
principion kalendario. Pot i hemplu, tinituhon gi 1 Oktubre, ni åñu feskat i
gobietnun Estados Unidus, gi 1 Hulio ni åñu feskat Australia, yan gi 1 Abrit ni
åñu feskat Canada.

Ma'usa i eran kalendario para mannå'i numiru gi sakkan, ya marifiri kåsun åntes
na tiempo pot i tinituhon i era. Gi kalendarion Grigorio marifiri i tiempon
mafañagon Jesukristu, i sakkan siha åntes di mafañago-ña (B.C), ya i sakkan siha
despues di mafañago-ña (A.D. ginen Latin anno domini: "gi sakkan Saina-ta").
Pa'go na tiempo guåha na man'u'usa C.E. (fino'Engles: Common Era) yan B.C.E.
(fino'Engles: Before Common Era).



https://ch.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hag%C3%A5t%C3%B1a

Hagåtña , eståba nå'an-ña Agana yan gi fino' Españot Agaña, i kapitat i islan
Guåhån. Mina'dos gi dikike' mineddong-ña kontodu gi populasion entre todu i
sengsong Guåhån. Eståba, i sentrun populasion Guåhån ha' Hagåtña ginen i
Mina'dies i ochu na siklo asta i talo' i Mina'bente na siklo. På'go, hagas ha'
unu ni mandistritu kometsio mayot kontodu nai gaige guenao i siyan gobietnu.

"Hagåtña" ginen "håga'-ña" ha'. Guåha na hinasso na ginen Hågat i fine'nena na
taotao Hagåtña. Sa' ginen "håga'" i palabra "Hågat". Gi 1998 na sakkan, i
Liheslaturan Guåhån ma tulaika i na'an-ña ofisiat "Agana" para "Hagåtña," i
na'an-ña orihinat gi fino' Chamoru (lao ti matulaika i na'an-ña ofisiat "Agana
Heights" para i na'an-ña gi fino' Chamoru "Tutuhan").

Gaige Hagåtña gi "pachot" i saddok Hagåtña gi lichan i patten Guåhån. Kana' 3 k
m 2 {\displaystyle km^{2}} (tres kuadrao kilumetro) i mineddong-ña Hagåtña.
Gaige gi sanlagu i chepchop unai, gi sankattan i saddok yan i sesonyan-ña, gi
sanhaya i ladera(ni Tutuhan gi hilo'). Guåha unu kuantos edificios gof takhilo'
gi santalo' i sengsong, yan puru residensia gi lichan i patten songsong (guenao
nå'an-ña Anigua). Ti parehu Hagåtña yan i otru na songsong, sa' manapattao i
sentro tiaguihi as Europa, ya manggaige meggai na dikike' na tenda yan
ristorantes siha gi halom gi talo' i sengsong. Gof hihot Hagåtña i manresidensia
ni mineggai taotao ni Mongmong-Toto-Maite.

I kapitat giya Guåhån guihi gi Hagåtña, pues manggaige guenao i Liheslatruan
Guåhån, i Ofisinan i Magalahi, kontodu otru na manofisinan gobietnon Guåhån. I
mayot maelihi gobietna i sengsong taiguenao i otru na songsong. I Gima' I Taotao
Guåhån, tradisionatmente i gima' i Magalahi, gaige gi hilo' i ladera, lao gi
magahet taigue ha' gi sengsong Hagåtña. Adelup, gaige guenao i ofisinan Magalahi
yan i manofisinan eksakatibu ginen i sakkan 1990, eståba ha' patten i sengsong
Assan åntes di ma annex ha' gi Hagåtña ya ma na'gaige guenao i siyan i Gobienton
Guåhån.

Gaibali Hagåtña esta åntes di manmatto i Españot siha. Gi sakkan 1668, matto i
fine'nena na misioneru Españot as Pale' San Vitores. I familian i Magalahi
Kepuha ma na'i i misioneru i tano' gi Hagåtña ya siña ma kahat i Dulce Nombre de
Maria Catedrat-Basilica (i fine'nena na Guma' Yu'us giya Guåhån).

Durante i gobitenan Españot, ma na'suha megagai na taotao Guåhån yan otru islas
Mariånas ginen i sengsong-ñiha para Hagåtña.

Sina manli'e sopblan i gobiento Españot gi Plaza de España hihot i catedrat i
Archdiocese Hagåtña.

Despues di finakpo' i Geran Españot-Amerikanu gi 1898, España ha nå'i i Estådos
Unidus ni gobietnan Guåhån. Ma kontinua ha' i siyan gobietno giya Hagåtña gi
administrasion i U.S. Naval Administration. Gi 1940 na sakkan, esta kasi dies
mit (10,000) na taotao Hagåtña, kana' lamita i taotao Guåhån siha.

I militat Chapones ma konne' Guåhån gi 8 Disembre, 1941. Annai i Amerikanu ma
na'libre Guåhån gi Segundo na Geran i Mundo, gof ma dañu i siudat ni bakudang
Amerikanu. Meggai na taotao Hagåtña manhuyong i siudat despues di Gera. Gi
planean kahat ta'lo i siudåt, i U.S. Navy ma fa'tinas manuebu na chalan ni
mantunas, lao umesek i sitio siha ni chalan, ya på'go guåha mas ki unu na dueño
i sitio. Este ha na'achaki i adelanton i siudat asta på'go.

Gaige i plasan batkon aire (Antonio B. Won Pat International Airport) giya
Tamuneng yan Barigåda.



https://ch.wikipedia.org/wiki/Si_Sirena

Åntes na tiempo, guåha un familia mañasaga giya Hagåtña. Guåha lokkue' un
bunitan palao'an gi familia ni na'an-ña si Sirena. Gus ya-ña si Sirena ñumangu,
espesiatmente gi halom i saddok Hagåtña. I nånan Sirena ha sangani gue' na kalan
guihan gue' gi halom hånom.

Åños yan åños maloffan guåha sumåga un palao'an na nå'an-ña si Sirena yan i
familia-ña hihot gi saddok Minondo. Åhe' ti put i guiya mas påtgon yan bunita gi
famagu'on; guiya lokkue' i mas suaben kurason. Lao guåha unu difekto-ña. Ga'o-ña
ñumangu yan humugando kini u cho'gue i che'cho' siha ni tinago' gue' as nåna-ña
para u cho'gue.

Gi Pasgua, ma a'alok, na i mames na sunidon i kampåna siha hohongga påpa' gi
liyang hånom, lineletge minahålang i kurason-ña. Ha tåtånga ñumangu gi saddok
taiguihi anai påpåtgon gue'. Ha mahålangi mamokkat gi chalan i sengsong yan i
amko' yan kulot åpu na guma' Yu'os. Ti ha tungo' na i mañiñila' na kandet gi
me'nan i santa Marian Kamalen para u inina i hinanao-ña tåtte para i lina'la' ni
ginen ha tungo'.



https://ch.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johann_Sebastian_Bach

Johann Sebastian Bach (Matso 21, 1685 - Hulio 28, 1750) un danderu åtmoniu yan
tituge' musika ginen Alemaña. Makonsidera gue' i mas takhilo' na tituge' musika
gi eran Baroque, ya mandinaña todus na klåsen musika Baroque ni musika-ña.
Kinahulo' i musikan Baroque gi i mas takhilo' na fotma ni musika-ña koru,
musiku, yan instrumento solo. Ti mamaa'tinas gue' nuebu na fotma, lao ha kuttiba
i fotman Aleman kontrapunta (mafana'an gue' i ma'gas kontrapunta), na
guinaguat-ña håtmonia yan otginasion-ña musika ni tairibat-ña, yan i inisan
kompas yan teksturan sanhiyong (tatkomu Italianu yan Frances).

Mientras afamao i nina'siña-ña gi åtmoniu gi lina'la'-ña, ti gus matungo' gue'
kumu tituge' musika. Sa' gus umusa gue' fotman Baroque yan i kontrapunta,
makonsidera gue' "antigu na moda" ni achataotao-ña, espesiatmente gi infin di
ofisinu-ña annai inisa i fotman Rocco (ya despues Klasiku) ni modan musika. Gi i
mina'dies i nuebi na sikglo numa'lo i interes fama'nu'en musika, ya pa'go gus
makonsidera gue' unu ni mas takhilo' na tituge' musika gi kostumbren sanlichan.



https://ch.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fanhaluman_komunida

Warm greeting from Belarusian Wikipedia! This year we celebrate 130. birthday of
Belarusian great poet.. ....s en:Yanka Kupala and en:Yakub Kolas Could you help
us to translate articles into your unique and honourable language? Thank you in
advance!--Rymchonak 06:03, 16 Eneru 2012 (UTC)

Please give a bot bit to SieBot, so it will not flood your RC as it adds
interwiki links using pywikipedia's interwiki.py. SieBot is active on about 160
Wikipedias. See the user page of the bot for more details, or check a complete
overview of its activities here. Cheers! Siebrand (talk) 08:20, 17 August 2007
(UTC)

Dear community. I am writing to you to promote a special wiki called Betawiki.
This wiki facilitates the localisation (l10n) of the MediaWiki interface. You
may have changed many messages here on this wiki to use your language, but if
you would log in to for example the English language Wiktionary, you would not
be able to use the interface as well translated as here. Infact, of the 1793
messages in the core of MediaWiki, 0 messages have been translated. Betawiki
also supports the translation of messages of almost 80 extensions, with 984
messages.

If you wish to contribute to better support of your language in MediaWiki, as
well as for many MediaWiki extensions, please visit Betawiki, create an account
and request translator priviledges. You can see the current status of
localisation of your language on meta and do not forget to get in touch with
others that may already be working on your language on Betawiki.

If you have any further questions, please let me know on my talk page on
Betawiki. We will try and help you as much as possible, for example by importing
all messages from a local wiki for you to start with, if you would like. You can
also find us on the Freenode IRC network in the channel #mediawiki-i18n where we
would be happy to help you get started.

Thank you very much for your attention and I do hope to see some of you on
Betawiki soon! Cheers! Siebrand@Betawiki 08:48, 24 September 2007 (UTC)

Hello. Sorry for not writing in Chamooro. As this wiki has no
sysop/administrator (only Drini, who is just temporary), I'd like to request
adminship. (I was temporary sysop yet twice: [1], ). --MF-Warburg 17:46, 30
October 2007 (UTC)

Since the proposal to close this wiki is going nowhere i might as well request a
bot bit:

Please, I request to block User:Phacebok, reason: vandalism (see
Special:Recentchanges, date 18 January 2008). Thanks.--Jatrobat 07:27, 18
January 2008 (UTC)

Please, I request to block User:Kyoko, reason: vandalism (see
Special:Recentchanges, date 18 April 2008). Thanks.--Jatrobat 01:34, 18 April
2008 (UTC)

Hello. To facilitate steward granting of bot access, I suggest implementing the
standard bot policy on this wiki. This will involve creating a redirect to this
page from Project:Bot policy, and adding a line at the top noting that it is
used here. In particular, this policy allows automatic acceptance of known
interlanguage linking bots (if this page says that is acceptable), which form
the vast majority of such requests.

Please read the text at m:Bot policy before commenting. If you object, please
say so; it will be implemented in one week if there is no objection, since it is
particularly written to streamline bot requests on wikis with little or no
community interested in bot access requests. Alleborgo 10:14, 14 Hunio 2008
(UTC)

Hello. The standard bot policy was updated to allow global bots, which are now
technically possible. These are trusted bots that will be given bot access on
all wikis that allow global bots (the local policy or request page must
explicitly allow them, or they won't get access on this wiki). The current
requirements for global bots are:

Does anyone object to allowing global bots on this wiki? I'll update the local
policy in a week if there are no objections. Thanks. —Pathoschild 22:55:08, 26
Hulio 2008 (UTC)

Hoi, the most often used MediaWiki messages (less than 25% of all MediaWiki
messages) are the most visible messages. They help our readers and editors the
most. We are aiming to get these messages localised for as many languages as
possible by the end of the year. Please help us and yourself and localise these
messages. Thanks, GerardM 10:44, 17 Nobiembre 2008 (UTC)

The LocalisationUpdate extension is now enabled for all Wikimedia projects. From
now on new localisations that become available in SVN will become available to
your project within 24 hours. Your localisations get into SVN from
translatewiki.net typically within a day and at worst in two days. This is a
huge improvement from the old practice where the localisations became available
with new software. This could take weeks, even months.

Local messages have an impact on the performance of our system. It is best when
messages are as much as possible part of the system messages. In order to remove
unnecessary duplication, all the messages that have a local localisation and are
exactly the same as the system message will be removed. What we ask you to do is
to compare and proof read the messages in translatewiki.net and the local
messages. You can then either remove local messages when the translatewiki.net
message is to be preferred or, you can update the message at translatewiki.net.

The best way to answer the first question is to visit the translatewiki.net.
Change the language to your language, select the “vector” skin and add the
advanced tool bar in in the preferences and check out the new functionality. And
make some changes in your user page. When there is a need to improve on the
localisation, please make the necessary changess . It should update your
localisation straight away. We would like you to report each issue individually
at http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Usability_issues.

We would like you to report each issue individually at
http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Language issues. The issues you raise will all be
assessed. It is important to keep each issue separate, because this will make it
easier to understand the issues and find solutions.

PS This text has been approved by Naoko, Brion and Siebrand. Thanks, GerardM
17:26, 28 Septembre 2009 (UTC)

A proposal for closure of the Chamorro Wikipedia has been added to Meta-Wiki.
http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Proposals_for_closing_projects/Closure_of_the_Cha
morro_Wikipedia_%282%29 --MisterWiki 20:23, 22 Febreru 2010 (UTC) Please help us
preserving this Wikipedia. There are a lot of dictionaries of chamorro-english
and chamorro-spanish.

The call for applications for Wikimania Scholarships to attend Wikimania 2010 in
Gdansk, Poland (July 9-11) is now open. The Wikimedia Foundation offers
Scholarships to pay for selected individuals' round trip travel, accommodations,
and registration at the conference. To apply, visit the Wikimania 2010
scholarships information page, click the secure link available there, and fill
out the form to apply. For additional information, please visit the Scholarships
information and FAQ pages:

Greetings! I notice that the project has no admins. I'm a global admin so if you
need any admin action being taken, you can contact me either by email on on my
main talk page. Fr33kman 17:23, 28 Hulio 2010 (UTC)

The meta translators are already actively engaged in the annual drive to
distribute our messages and we encourage you to do the same, but we would like
to point everyone to the developments we've made in banner messages- from
creation to commentary to the ones that will go live for test and for the drive
itself in November. It's one of our goals to make sure that all volunteers know
that there is a place for them in the Fundraising drive. We've started the setup
on meta for both banner submission, statistical analysis, and grouping
volunteers together that would like to find specific focus and work in that
area.

Fundraising 2010 is preparing to start, and we want your project to be a part of
the global movement to support free knowledge. The Wikimedia Foundation is
engaging with local communities that build the projects to play an active part
in this year's fundraiser. This year we will be working to best serve all the
language communities by providing messages that are best suited for each
location.

To do this, we need your help. We are testing messages and we want to be sure
that our messages will work with your language. If it does not and your
community can come up with your own banner in the spirit of supporting free
knowledge, we invite you to submit your proposals and be active in this process.
Wikimedia is for you, join us in supporting free knowledge in your local
community! Keegan, WMF Fundraiser 2010 04:59, 15 Septembre 2010 (UTC)

The Fundraising Committee is issuing all interested community members a
challenge: we want you to beat Jimmy. The appeal from Jimmy Wales and the
corresponding banner have been tested head-to-head with other successful
banners, and the results are clear: it's our best performing message... by a
lot. This year we have a lofty fundraising goal; we need all of our banners to
bring in donations like the Jimmy Appeal, but no one wants to keep the Jimmy
banner up for two months. We want to run donor quotes, and other wonderful
ideas, but we have to have banners that work as well as or better than the Jimmy
appeal.

We've just released the highlights from a donor focus group, and the results of
our donor survey. With one month to the launch of the fundraiser, the messages
we test must be driven by data from our tests and surveys - we can no longer
rely on instinct alone.

We've redesigned our fundraising meta pages with the Jimmy challenge; check out
the survey results and propose/discuss banners that reflect these findings. Add
the banners you think will 'beat Jimmy' here to be tested Tuesday October 12
against Jimmy. Keegan, WMF Fundraiser 2010 02:55, 8 Oktubre 2010 (UTC)

I am here to request for sysop rights so that I can help fight vandalism without
the need of global sysops. Please promote me to sysop as soon as possible.
Thanks! Hydriz 16:41, 30 Oktubre 2010 (UTC)

Further details and educational materials will be available shortly. The
referendum is scheduled for 12-27 August, 2011, and will be conducted on servers
hosted by a neutral third party. Referendum details, officials, voting
requirements, and supporting materials will be posted at Meta:Image filter
referendum shortly.

Sorry for delivering you a message in English. Please help translate the pages
on the referendum on Meta and join the translators mailing list.

For the coordinating committee, Philippe (WMF) Cbrown1023 Risker Mardetanha
PeterSymonds Robert Harris

The Wikimedia Foundation has brought together a new team of developers who are
dedicated to language support. This team is to support all the languages and
consequently it is not realistic to expect that the team members can provide
proper support for your language. It is for this reason that we are looking for
volunteers who will make up a language support team.

As much of the activity will be concentrated on translatewiki.net, it will be a
plus when team members know how to localise at translatewiki.net. Thanks,
Gmeijssen 06:44, 17 Oktubre 2011 (UTC)

I apologize that you are receiving this message in English. Please help
translate it.

The Wikimedia Foundation is discussing changes to its Terms of Use. The
discussion can be found at Talk:Terms of use. Everyone is invited to join in.
Because the new version of Terms of use is not in final form, we are not able to
present official translations of it. Volunteers are welcome to translate it, as
German volunteers have done at m:Terms of use/de, but we ask that you note at
the top that the translation is unofficial and may become outdated as the
English version is changed. The translation request can be found at
m:Translation requests/WMF/Terms of Use 2 -- Maggie Dennis, Community Liaison
00:33, 27 Oktubre 2011 (UTC)

Hello Wikipedians, my name is Alex and I am working for the Wikimedia Foundation
during the 2011 Fundraiser. This year's fundraiser is intended to be a
collaborative and global effort; we recognize that messages which may perform
well in the United States don't necessarily translate well, or appeal to
international audiences.

I'm contacting you as I am currently looking for volunteers who are willing to
contribute to this project by helping translate and localize messages into your
local language, suggesting community appeals for us to use, and to provide us
with feedback on the Fundraising Meta Page. We've started the setup on meta for
both translation, statistical analysis, and local discussion and testing. We
actively encourage focusing discussion on meta so we can all work together. Use
the talk pages on meta, talk to your local communities, talk to others, talk to
us. Engagement is what we strive for, without each other we would never had made
Wikimedia succeed. The staff working on this fundraiser is comprised of
long-time Wikimedians with as much care and concern for the success of this
drive as the volunteers, and we want you to actively participate and have a
voice. Everyone is welcome to contact any of us on staff at any time with a
timely response to follow. I look forward to working with you during this year's
fundraiser.

If someone could translate this message I would really appreciate it so that
everyone is able to understand our goals and contribute to this year's campaign.
Azariv 23:19, 31 Oktubre 2011 (UTC)

Hello, I've seen there isn't any sysop, and I thought to myself if you need one.
I'm an experienced editor in Spanish Wikipedia, and if you want, I could help
with flagging, deleting evident things or similar like a sysop and bureaucrat.
Regards. Mr.Ajedrez 16:51, 13 Disiembre 2011 (UTC)

I apologize that you are receiving this message in English. Please help
translate it.

The Wikimedia Foundation is seeking Community Fellows and project ideas for the
Community Fellowship Program. A Fellowship is a temporary position at the
Wikimedia Foundation in order to work on a specific project or set of projects.
Submissions for 2012 are encouraged to focus on the theme of improving editor
retention and increasing participation in Wikimedia projects. If interested,
please submit a project idea or apply to be a fellow by January 15, 2012. Please
visit https://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Wikimedia_Fellowships for more
information.

--Siko Bouterse, Head of Community Fellowships, Wikimedia Foundation 12:49, 21
Disiembre 2011 (UTC)

Wikimedia Foundation is getting ready to push out 1.19 to all the WMF-hosted
wikis. As we finish wrapping up our code review, you can test the new version
right now on beta.wmflabs.org. For more information, please read the release
notes or the start of the final announcement.

Report any problems on the labs beta wiki and we'll work to address them before
they software is released to the production wikis.

Note that this cluster does have SUL but it is not integrated with SUL in
production, so you'll need to create another account. You should avoid using the
same password as you use here. — Global message delivery 23:59, 14 Eneru 2012
(UTC)

(Apologies if this message isn't in your language.) The Wikimedia Foundation is
planning to upgrade MediaWiki (the software powering this wiki) to its latest
version this month. You can help to test it before it is enabled, to avoid
disruption and breakage. More information is available in the full announcement.
Thank you for your understanding.

Guillaume Paumier, via the Global message delivery system (wrong page? You can
fix it.). 14:51, 12 Febreru 2012 (UTC)

(Apologies if this message isn't in your language. Please consider translating
it, as well as the full version of this announcement on Meta)

The Wikimedia Foundation is planning to do limited testing of IPv6 on June 2-3.
If there are not too many problems, we may fully enable IPv6 on World IPv6 day
(June 6), and keep it enabled.

Read the full version of this announcement on how to test the behavior of IPv6
with various tools and how to leave bug reports, and to find a fuller analysis
of the implications of the IPv6 migration.

--Erik Möller, VP of Engineering and Product Development, Wikimedia Foundation
00:46, 2 Hunio 2012 (UTC)

Wikimedia Commons is happy to announce that the 2011 Picture of the Year
competition is now open. We are interested in your opinion as to which images
qualify to be the Picture of the Year 2011. Any user registered at Commons or a
Wikimedia wiki SUL-related to Commons with more than 75 edits before 1 April
2012 (UTC) is welcome to vote and, of course everyone is welcome to view!

About 600 of the best of Wikimedia Common's photos, animations, movies and
graphics were chosen –by the international Wikimedia Commons community– out of
12 million files during 2011 and are now called Featured Pictures.

From professional animal and plant shots to breathtaking panoramas and skylines,
restorations of historically relevant images, images portraying the world's best
architecture, maps, emblems, diagrams created with the most modern technology,
and impressive human portraits, Commons Features Pictures of all flavors.

See you on Commons! --Picture of the Year 2011 Committee 18:06, 5 Hunio 2012
(UTC)

(Apologies if this message isn't in your language. Please consider translating
it)

As many of you are aware, the Wikimedia Board of Trustees recently initiated
important changes in the way that money is being distributed within the
Wikimedia movement. As part of this, a new community-led "Funds Dissemination
Committee" (FDC) is currently being set up. Already in 2012-13, its
recommendations will guide the decisions about the distribution of over 10
million US dollars among the Foundation, chapters and other eligible entities.

Now, seven capable, knowledgeable and trustworthy community members are sought
to volunteer on the initial Funds Dissemination Committee. It is expected to
take up its work in September. In addition, a community member is sought to be
the Ombudsperson for the FDC process. If you are interested in joining the
committee, read the call for volunteers. Nominations are planned to close on
August 15.

--Anasuya Sengupta, Director of Global Learning and Grantmaking, Wikimedia
Foundation 19:55, 19 Hulio 2012 (UTC)

You might also be interested in the idea to create a central Wikipedia Library
where approved editors would have access to all participating resource donors.
Add your feedback to the Community Fellowship proposal. Apologies for the
English message (translate here). Go sign up :) --Ocaasi (talk) 02:12, 16 Agosto
2012 (UTC)

I apologize for addressing you in English. I would be grateful if you could
translate this message into your language.

The Wikimedia Foundation is conducting a request for comment on a proposed
program that could provide legal assistance to users in specific support roles
who are named in a legal complaint as a defendant because of those roles. We
wanted to be sure that your community was aware of this discussion and would
have a chance to participate in that discussion.

If this page is not the best place to publicize this request for comment, please
help spread the word to those who may be interested in participating. (If you'd
like to help translating the "request for comment", program policy or other
pages into your language and don't know how the translation system works, please
come by my user talk page at m:User talk:Mdennis (WMF). I'll be happy to assist
or to connect you with a volunteer who can assist.)

As some of you might already have heard Wikimedia Deutschland is working on a
new Wikimedia project. It is called m:Wikidata. The goal of Wikidata is to
become a central data repository for the Wikipedias, its sister projects and the
world. In the future it will hold data like the number of inhabitants of a
country, the date of birth of a famous person or the length of a river. These
can then be used in all Wikimedia projects and outside of them.

It'd be great if you could join us, test the demo version, provide feedback and
take part in the development of Wikidata. You can find all the relevant
information including an FAQ and sign-up links for our on-wiki newsletter on the
Wikidata page on Meta.

For further discussions please use this talk page (if you are uncomfortable
writing in English you can also write in your native language there) or point me
to the place where your discussion is happening so I can answer there.

Hello! This wiki will be switched to the up to date Wikipedia logo in about a
week. You can see it on commons:Wikipedia/2.0; please comment on talk if there's
something wrong with it. Thank you, Global message delivery (feedback) 21:35, 22
Septembre 2012 (UTC)

The only pre-requisite is for the volunteer to actually live in the country and
to have access to at least one donation method that we offer for that country
(mainly credit/debit card, but also real-time banking like IDEAL, E-wallets,
etc...) so we can do a live test and see if the donation goes through. All
volunteers will be reimbursed of the donations that eventually succeed (and they
will be low amounts, like 1-2 dollars)

(Apologies if this message isn't in your language.) Next week, the Wikimedia
Foundation will transition its main technical operations to a new data center in
Ashburn, Virginia, USA. This is intended to improve the technical performance
and reliability of all Wikimedia sites, including this wiki. There will be some
times when the site will be in read-only mode, and there may be full outages;
the current target windows for the migration are January 22nd, 23rd and 24th,
2013, from 17:00 to 01:00 UTC (see other timezones on timeanddate.com). More
information is available in the full announcement.

If you would like to stay informed of future technical upgrades, consider
becoming a Tech ambassador and joining the ambassadors mailing list. You will be
able to help your fellow Wikimedians have a voice in technical discussions and
be notified of important decisions.

Guillaume Paumier, via the Global message delivery system (wrong page? You can
fix it.). 15:05, 19 Eneru 2013 (UTC)

Wikidata has been in development for a few months now. It is now time for the
roll-out of the first part of it on your Wikipedia. Phase 1 is the support for
the management of language links. It is already being used on the Hungarian,
Hebrew, Italian and English Wikipedias. The next step is to enable the extension
on all other Wikipedias. We have currently planned this for March 6.

Editors on en:wp have created a great page with all the necessary information
for editors and there is also an FAQ for this deployment. Please ask questions
you might have on the FAQ’s discussion page.

To stay up-to-date on everything happening around Wikidata please subscribe to
the newsletter that is delivered weekly to subscribed user’s talk pages. You can
see previous editions here.

Sorry for writing in English. I hope someone can translate this locally. If you
understand German better than English you can have a look at the announcement on
de:Wikipedia:Kurier.

As I annonced 2 weeks ago, Wikidata phase 1 (language links) has been deployed
here today. Language links in the sidebar are coming from Wikidata in addition
to the ones in the wiki text. To edit them, scroll to the bottom of the language
links, and click edit. You no longer need to maintain these links by hand in the
wiki text of the article.

Where can I find more information and ask questions? Editors on en:wp have
created a great page with all the necessary information for editors and there is
also an FAQ for this deployment. It'd be great if you could bring this to this
wiki if that has not already happened. Please ask questions you might have on
the FAQ’s discussion page.

I want to be kept up to date about Wikidata To stay up-to-date on everything
happening around Wikidata please subscribe to the newsletter that is delivered
weekly to subscribed user’s talk pages.

(Please consider translating this message for the benefit of your fellow
Wikimedians)

Greetings. As you might have seen on the Wikimedia tech blog or the tech
ambassadors list, a new functionality called "Lua" is being enabled on all
Wikimedia sites today. Lua is a scripting language that enables you to write
faster and more powerful MediaWiki templates.

If you have questions about how to convert existing templates to Lua (or how to
create new ones), we'll be holding two support sessions on IRC next week: one on
Wednesday (for Oceania, Asia & America) and one on Friday (for Europe, Africa &
America); see m:IRC office hours for the details. If you can't make it, you can
also get help at mw:Talk:Lua scripting.

If you'd like to learn about this kind of events earlier in advance, consider
becoming a Tech ambassador by subscribing to the mailing list. You will also be
able to help your fellow Wikimedians have a voice in technical discussions and
be notified of important decisions.

Guillaume Paumier, via the Global message delivery system. 18:53, 13 Matso 2013
(UTC) (wrong page? You can fix it.)

Sorry for writing in English. I hope someone can translate this. If you
understand German better than English you can have a look at the announcement on
de:Wikipedia:Kurier.

A while ago the first phase of Wikidata was enabled on this Wikipedia. This
means you are getting the language links in each article from Wikidata. It is
soon time to enable the second phase of Wikidata (infoboxes) here. We have
already done this on the [first 11 Wikipedias] (it, he, hu, ru, tr, uk, uz, hr,
bs, sr, sh) and things are looking good. The next step is English Wikipedia.
This is planned for April 8. If everything works out fine we will deploy on all
remaining Wikipedias on April 10. I will update this part of the FAQ if there
are any issues forcing us to change this date. I will also sent another note to
this village pump once the deployment is finished.

What will happen once we have phase 2 enabled here? Once it is enabled in a few
days you will be able to make use of the structured data that is available on
Wikidata in your articles/infoboxes. It includes things like the symbol for a
chemical element, the ISBN for a book or the top level domain of a country.
(None of this will happen automatically. Someone will have to change the article
or infobox template for this to happen!)

We are working on expanding the parser function so you can for example use
{{#property:chief executive officer}} instead of {{#property:p169}}. The
complete plan for this is here.

Where can I find more information and ask questions? We have collected the main
questions in an FAQ for this deployment. Please ask questions you might have on
the FAQ’s discussion page.

I want to be kept up to date about Wikidata To stay up-to-date on everything
happening around Wikidata please subscribe to the newsletter that is delivered
weekly to subscribed user’s talk pages.

(Please consider translating this message for the benefit of your fellow
Wikimedians. Please also consider translating the proposal.)

Read this message in English / Lleer esti mensaxe n'asturianu / বাংলায় এই
বার্তাটি পড়ুন / Llegiu aquest missatge en català / Læs denne besked på dansk /
Lies diese Nachricht auf Deutsch / Leś cal mesag' chè in Emiliàn / Leer este
mensaje en español / Lue tämä viesti suomeksi / Lire ce message en français /
Ler esta mensaxe en galego / हिन्दी / Pročitajte ovu poruku na hrvatskom / Baca
pesan ini dalam Bahasa Indonesia / Leggi questo messaggio in italiano / ಈ
ಸಂದೇಶವನ್ನು ಕನ್ನಡದಲ್ಲಿ ಓದಿ / Aqra dan il-messaġġ bil-Malti / norsk (bokmål) /
Lees dit bericht in het Nederlands / Przeczytaj tę wiadomość po polsku / Citiți
acest mesaj în română / Прочитать это сообщение на русском / Farriintaan ku aqri
Af-Soomaali / Pročitaj ovu poruku na srpskom (Прочитај ову поруку на српском) /
อ่านข้อความนี้ในภาษาไทย / Прочитати це повідомлення українською мовою / Đọc
thông báo bằng tiếng Việt / 使用中文阅读本信息。

There is a new request for comment on Meta-Wiki concerning the removal of
administrative rights from long-term inactive Wikimedians. Generally, this
proposal from stewards would apply to wikis without an administrators' review
process.

We are also compiling a list of projects with procedures for removing inactive
administrators on the talk page of the request for comment. Feel free to add
your project(s) to the list if you have a policy on administrator inactivity.

Thanks, Billinghurst (thanks to all the translators!) 04:23, 24 Abrit 2013 (UTC)

Sorry for writing in English. I hope someone can translate this. If you
understand German better than English you can have a look at the announcement on
de:Wikipedia:Kurier.

A while ago the first phase of Wikidata was enabled on this Wikipedia. This
means you are getting the language links in each article from Wikidata. We have
now enabled the second phase of Wikidata (infoboxes) here. We have already done
this on the [first 11 Wikipedias] (it, he, hu, ru, tr, uk, uz, hr, bs, sr, sh) a
month ago and two days ago on the English Wikipedia. Today all the remaining
Wikipedias followed.

What does having phase 2 enabled here mean? You are now able to make use of the
structured data that is available on Wikidata in your articles/infoboxes. It
includes things like the symbol for a chemical element, the ISBN for a book or
the top level domain of a country. (None of this will happen automatically.
Someone will have to change the article or infobox template for this to happen!)
The current state is just the beginning though. It will be extended based on
feedback we get from you now.

We are working on expanding the parser function so you can for example use
{{#property:headquarter location}} instead of {{#property:p159}}. The complete
plan for this is here.

Where can I test this? You can test it on test2 if you don't want to do it in an
article here.

Where can I find more information and ask questions? We have collected the main
questions in an FAQ for this deployment. Please ask questions you might have on
the FAQ’s discussion page.

I want to be kept up to date about Wikidata To stay up-to-date on everything
happening around Wikidata please subscribe to the newsletter that is delivered
weekly to subscribed user’s talk pages.

We are excited about taking yet another step towards allowing all Wikipedias
share structured data and collect and curate it together. --Lydia Pintscher
19:04, 24 Abrit 2013 (UTC)

Hi, apologies for posting this in English, but I wanted to alert your community
to a discussion on Meta about potential changes to the Wikimedia Trademark
Policy. Please translate this statement if you can. We hope that you will all
participate in the discussion; we also welcome translations of the legal team’s
statement into as many languages as possible and encourage you to voice your
thoughts there. Please see the Trademark practices discussion (on Meta-Wiki) for
more information. Thank you! --Mdennis (WMF) (talk)

The Wikipedia Library gets Wikipedia editors free access to reliable sources
that are behind paywalls. I want to alert you to our latest donation.

My apologies for the incorrect link: You can sign up for Cochrane Collaboration
accounts at the COCHRANE sign-up page. Cheers, Ocaasi 21:33, 16 Hunio 2013 (UTC)

Hello, Sorry for English but It's very important for bot operators so I hope
someone translates this. Pywikipedia is migrating to Git so after July 26, SVN
checkouts won't be updated If you're using Pywikipedia you have to switch to
git, otherwise you will use out-dated framework and your bot might not work
properly. There is a manual for doing that and a blog post explaining about this
change in non-technical language. If you have question feel free to ask in
mw:Manual talk:Pywikipediabot/Gerrit, mailing list, or in the IRC channel. Best
Amir (via Global message delivery). 12:58, 23 Hulio 2013 (UTC)

The Wikimedia Foundation will soon turn on VisualEditor for all users, all the
time on your Wikipedia. Right now your Wikipedia does not have any local
documents on VisualEditor, and we hope that your community can change that. To
find out about how you can help with translations visit the TranslationCentral
for VisualEditor and read the easy instructions on bringing information to your
Wikipedia. The User Guide and the FAQ are very important to have in your
language.

We want to find out as much as we can from you about VisualEditor and how it
helps your Wikipedia, and having local pages is a great way to start. We also
encourage you to leave feedback on Mediawiki where the community can offer
ideas, opinions, and point out bugs that may still exist in the software that
need to be reported to Bugzilla. If you are able to speak for the concerns of
others in English on MediaWiki or locally I encourage you to help your community
to be represented in this process.

If you can help translate the user interface for VisualEditor to your language,
you can help with that as well. Translatewiki has open tasks for translating
VisualEditor. A direct link to translate the user interface is here. You can see
how we are doing with those translations here. You need an account on
Translatewiki to translate. This account is free and easy to create.

If we can help your community in any way with this process, please let me know
and I will do my best to assist your Wikipedia with this |exciting development.
You can contact me on my meta talk page or by email. You can also contact
Patrick Earley for help with translations and documents on Mediawiki. We look
forward to working with you to bring the VisualEditor experience to your
Wikipedia! Keegan (WMF) (talk) 18:59, 30 Hulio 2013 (UTC)

Greetings. Starting on August 21 (tomorrow), all users with an account will be
using HTTPS to access Wikimedia sites. HTTPS brings better security and improves
your privacy. More information is available at m:HTTPS.

If HTTPS causes problems for you, tell us on bugzilla, on IRC (in the
#wikimedia-operations channel) or on meta. If you can't use the other methods,
you can also send an e-mail to https@wikimedia.org.

Greg Grossmeier (via the Global message delivery system). 18:49, 20 Agosto 2013
(UTC) (wrong page? You can fix it.)

Notifications will inform users about new activity that affects them on this
wiki in a unified way: for example, this new tool will let you know when you
have new talk page messages, edit reverts, mentions or links -- and is designed
to augment (rather than replace) the watchlist. The Wikimedia Foundation's
editor engagement team developed this tool (code-named 'Echo') earlier this
year, to help users contribute more productively to MediaWiki projects.

We're now getting ready to bring Notifications to almost all other Wikimedia
sites, and are aiming for a 22 October deployment, as outlined in this release
plan. It is important that notifications is translated for all of the languages
we serve.

Please let us know if you have any questions, suggestions or comments about this
new tool. For more information, visit this project hub and this help page.
Keegan (WMF) (talk) 18:14, 4 Oktubre 2013 (UTC)

I apologize for this message being only in English. Please translate it if
needed to help your community.

The Wikimedia Foundation's multimedia team seeks community guidance on a
proposal to support the MP4 video format. This digital video standard is used
widely around the world to record, edit and watch videos on mobile phones,
desktop computers and home video devices. It is also known as H.264/MPEG-4 or
AVC.

You are also welcome to join tomorrow's Office hours chat on IRC, this Thursday,
January 16, at 19:00 UTC, if you would like to discuss this project with our
team and other community members.

We look forward to a constructive discussion with you, so we can make a more
informed decision together on this important topic. Keegan (WMF) (talk) 06:47,
16 Eneru 2014 (UTC)

Greetings! The Individual Engagement Grants program is accepting proposals for
funding new experiments from September 1st to 30th. Your idea could improve
Wikimedia projects with a new tool or gadget, a better process to support
community-building on your wiki, research on an important issue, or something
else we haven't thought of yet. Whether you need $200 or $30,000 USD, Individual
Engagement Grants can cover your own project development time in addition to
hiring others to help you.

(Sorry for the English - please translate this message!) MediaWiki message
delivery (talk) 20:01, 4 Matso 2015 (UTC)

This project is being considered for closure.
m:Proposals_for_closing_projects/Closure_of_Chamorro_Wikipedia_2. --Slayer is
awesome and cool talk 18:21, 21 March 2015 (UTC)

Hello, I made a proposal on Meta to change the rules for the steward
confirmations. Currently consensus to remove is required for a steward to lose
his status, however I think it's fairer to the community if every steward needed
the consensus to keep. As this is an issue that affects all WMF wikis, I'm
sending this notification to let people know & be able to participate. Best
regards, --MF-W 16:12, 10 Abrit 2015 (UTC)

I am completely aware about bot policy. plese help by supporting here.बेनुपराज
पौडेल (talk) 02:18, 11 Abrit 2015 (UTC)

This is a message from the 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee.
Translations are available.

I am pleased to announce that nominations are now being accepted for the 2015
Wikimedia Foundation Elections. This year the Board and the FDC Staff are
looking for a diverse set of candidates from regions and projects that are
traditionally under-represented on the board and in the movement as well as
candidates with experience in technology, product or finance. To this end they
have published letters describing what they think is needed and, recognizing
that those who know the community the best are the community themselves, the
election committee is accepting nominations for community members you think
should run and will reach out to those nominated to provide them with
information about the job and the election process.

Board of Trustees The Board of Trustees is the decision-making body that is
ultimately responsible for the long term sustainability of the Foundation, so we
value wide input into its selection. There are three positions being filled.
More information about this role can be found at the board elections page.

Funds Dissemination Committee (FDC) The Funds Dissemination Committee (FDC)
makes recommendations about how to allocate Wikimedia movement funds to eligible
entities. There are five positions being filled. More information about this
role can be found at the FDC elections page.

Funds Dissemination Committee (FDC) Ombud The FDC Ombud receives complaints and
feedback about the FDC process, investigates complaints at the request of the
Board of Trustees, and summarizes the investigations and feedback for the Board
of Trustees on an annual basis. One position is being filled. More information
about this role can be found at the FDC Ombudsperson elections page.

The candidacy submission phase lasts from 00:00 UTC April 20 to 23:59 UTC May 5
for the Board and from 00:00 UTCApril 20 to 23:59 UTC April 30 for the FDC and
FDC Ombudsperson. This year, we are accepting both self-nominations and
nominations of others. More information on this election and the nomination
process can be found on the 2015 Wikimedia elections page on Meta-Wiki.

On behalf of the Elections Committee, -Gregory Varnum (User:Varnent)
Coordinator, 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee

Posted by the MediaWiki message delivery on behalf of the 2015 Wikimedia
Foundation Elections Committee, 05:03, 21 April 2015 (UTC) • Translate • Get
help

This is a message from the 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee.
Translations are available.

Voting has begun for eligible voters in the 2015 elections for the Funds
Dissemination Committee (FDC) and FDC Ombudsperson. Questions and discussion
with the candidates for the Funds Dissemination Committee (FDC) and FDC
Ombudsperson will continue during the voting. Nominations for the Board of
Trustees will be accepted until 23:59 UTC May 5.

The Funds Dissemination Committee (FDC) makes recommendations about how to
allocate Wikimedia movement funds to eligible entities. There are five positions
on the committee being filled.

The FDC Ombudsperson receives complaints and feedback about the FDC process,
investigates complaints at the request of the Board of Trustees, and summarizes
the investigations and feedback for the Board of Trustees on an annual basis.
One position is being filled.

The voting phase lasts from 00:00 UTC May 3 to 23:59 UTC May 10. Click here to
vote. Questions and discussion with the candidates will continue during that
time. Click here to ask the FDC candidates a question. Click here to ask the FDC
Ombudsperson candidates a question. More information on the candidates and the
elections can be found on the 2015 FDC election page, the 2015 FDC Ombudsperson
election page, and the 2015 Board election page on Meta-Wiki.

On behalf of the Elections Committee, -Gregory Varnum (User:Varnent) Volunteer
Coordinator, 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee

Posted by the MediaWiki message delivery 03:45, 4 May 2015 (UTC) • Translate •
Get help

This is a message from the 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee.
Translations are available.

Voting has begun for eligible voters in the 2015 elections for the Wikimedia
Foundation Board of Trustees. Questions and discussion with the candidates for
the Board will continue during the voting.

The Wikimedia Foundation Board of Trustees is the ultimate governing authority
of the Wikimedia Foundation, a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization registered in
the United States. The Wikimedia Foundation manages many diverse projects such
as Wikipedia and Commons.

The voting phase lasts from 00:00 UTC May 17 to 23:59 UTC May 31. Click here to
vote. More information on the candidates and the elections can be found on the
2015 Board election page on Meta-Wiki.

On behalf of the Elections Committee, -Gregory Varnum (User:Varnent) Volunteer
Coordinator, 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee

Posted by the MediaWiki message delivery 17:20, 17 May 2015 (UTC) • Translate •
Get help

This is a message from the 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee.
Translations are available.

Voting has begun for eligible voters in the 2015 elections for the Wikimedia
Foundation Board of Trustees. Questions and discussion with the candidates for
the Board will continue during the voting.

The Wikimedia Foundation Board of Trustees is the ultimate governing authority
of the Wikimedia Foundation, a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization registered in
the United States. The Wikimedia Foundation manages many diverse projects such
as Wikipedia and Commons.

The voting phase lasts from 00:00 UTC May 17 to 23:59 UTC May 31. Click here to
vote. More information on the candidates and the elections can be found on the
2015 Board election page on Meta-Wiki.

On behalf of the Elections Committee, -Gregory Varnum (User:Varnent) Volunteer
Coordinator, 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee

Posted by the MediaWiki message delivery 17:20, 17 May 2015 (UTC) • Translate •
Get help

Hello, Content Translation has now been enabled as an opt-in beta feature on the
Chamorro Wikipedia. To start translating:

Since this is the first time we have installed the tool on this Wikipedia, there
are chances that there may be some problems or service disruptions which we are
not yet aware of. We will be monitoring the usage to check for any failures or
issues, but please do let us know on the Content Translation talk page or
through Phabricator if you spot any problems that prevent you from using the
tool. For more information, please read the information available in the User
Guide. Our announcement is written only in English, and we would really
appreciate if this message can be translated to reach more users of this
Wikipedia. Thank you. --KartikMistry (talk) 16:10, 16 Hunio 2015 (UTC)

My apologies for posting this message in English. Please help translate it if
you can.

The Wikimedia Foundation would like your feedback about how we can reimagine
Wikimedia Foundation grants, to better support people and ideas in your
Wikimedia project. Ways to participate:

(Opt-out Instructions) This message was sent by I JethroBT (WMF) through
MediaWiki message delivery. 23:09, 18 Agosto 2015 (UTC)

Please help translate the statements on Meta Wiki. You can read more on the
Wikimedia blog.

Last month, we asked for community feedback on a proposal to change the
structure of WMF grant programs. Thanks to the 200+ people who participated! A
report on what we learned and changed based on this consultation is now
available.

Come read about the findings and next steps as WMF’s Community Resources team
begins to implement changes based on your feedback. Your questions and comments
are welcome on the outcomes discussion page.

Last month, we asked for community feedback on a proposal to change the
structure of WMF grant programs. Thanks to the 200+ people who participated! A
report on what we learned and changed based on this consultation is now
available.

Come read about the findings and next steps as WMF’s Community Resources team
begins to implement changes based on your feedback. Your questions and comments
are welcome on the outcomes discussion page.

The Community Advocacy team the Wikimedia Foundation has opened a consultation
on the topic of harassment on Meta. The consultation period is intended to run
for one month from today, November 16, and end on December 17. Please share your
thoughts there on harassment-related issues facing our communities and potential
solutions. (Note: this consultation is not intended to evaluate specific cases
of harassment, but rather to discuss the problem of harassment itself.)

This is a message regarding the proposed 2015 Free Bassel banner. Translations
are available.

This is to inform all Wikimedia contributors that a straw poll seeking your
involvement has just been started on Meta-Wiki.

As some of your might be aware, a small group of Wikimedia volunteers have
proposed a banner campaign informing Wikipedia readers about the urgent
situation of our fellow Wikipedian, open source software developer and Creative
Commons activist, Bassel Khartabil. An exemplary banner and an explanatory page
have now been prepared, and translated into about half a dozen languages by
volunteer translators.

We are seeking your involvement to decide if the global Wikimedia community
approves starting a banner campaign asking Wikipedia readers to call on the
Syrian government to release Bassel from prison. We understand that a campaign
like this would be unprecedented in Wikipedia's history, which is why we're
seeking the widest possible consensus among the community.

Given Bassel's urgent situation and the resulting tight schedule, we ask
everyone to get involved with the poll and the discussion to the widest possible
extent, and to promote it among your communities as soon as possible.

(Apologies for writing in English; please kindly translate this message into
your own language.)

Posted by the MediaWiki message delivery 21:47, 25 November 2015 (UTC) •
Translate • Get help

Patrick Earley (WMF) via MediaWiki message delivery (talk) 01:49, 5 Eneru 2016
(UTC)

Your input is welcome (and greatly desired) at the Meta discussion, 2016
Strategy/Community consultation.

Apologies for English, where this is posted on a non-English project. We thought
it was more important to get the consultation translated as much as possible,
and good headway has been made there in some languages. There is still much to
do, however! We created m:2016 Strategy/Translations to try to help coordinate
what needs translation and what progress is being made. :)

I hope you'll join us! Maggie Dennis via MediaWiki message delivery (talk)
19:06, 18 Eneru 2016 (UTC)

Hello, after six weeks of community discussion about Wikipedia to the Moon,
there are now 10 different proposals for content for the mission. Starting
today, you can vote for them on Meta-Wiki, and decide what we will work on: a
Wikipedia canon, different lists, the Moon in 300 languages, an astronomy
editathon, featured articles, articles about technology, endangered things, or
DNA-related topics. You can even vote against community involvement. Voting is
open until 24 June. Sorry that this message is again in English only, but we are
using village pumps to reach as many communities as possible, so that everyone
knows they can vote. Best, Moon team at Wikimedia Deutschland 15:31, 10 Hunio
2016 (UTC)

I am completely aware about bot policy. plese help by supporting here. -राजा
उप्रेती (talk) 01:43, 27 Septembre 2016 (UTC)

Hello! I'm writing from the Wikimedia Foundation to invite you to give your
feedback on a proposed move from CC BY-SA 3.0 to a CC BY-SA 4.0 license across
all Wikimedia projects. The consultation will run from October 5 to November 8,
and we hope to receive a wide range of viewpoints and opinions. Please, if you
are interested, take part in the discussion on Meta-Wiki.

Apologies that this message is only in English. This message can be read and
translated in more languages here. Joe Sutherland (talk) 01:34, 6 Oktubre 2016
(UTC)

I apologise that this message is in English.
⧼Centralnotice-shared-help-translate⧽

Select strong passwords – eight or more characters long, and containing letters,
numbers, and punctuation. Joe Sutherland (Kuentusi) / MediaWiki message delivery
(talk) 00:00, 14 Nobiembre 2016 (UTC)

Please accept my apologies - that first line should read "Help with
translations!". Joe Sutherland (WMF) (talk) / MediaWiki message delivery (talk)
00:11, 14 Nobiembre 2016 (UTC)

James Forrester (Product Manager, Editing department, Wikimedia Foundation)
--19:32, 14 Disiembre 2016 (UTC)



https://ch.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guam

Gaige islan Guåhån (Engles: Guam) gi mås yahåyaya gi kadenan Marianas ya guiya
mås dångkolu entre todu i isla yan úniku minantietieni ni Estados Unidos desde
1898 na sakkan. Mafa'nana'an i isla "Tollai Amerika asta guatu Asia" sa' put i
minåolek pusisión-ña gi yeogråfiku yan ekonomia. Ma tatáncho' este na isla kåsi
9700 (nuebi mit siete sientos) kilumetro gi ge'lichan San Francisco, 6000 (sais
mit) kilumetro ge'lichan låo sumanhaya patte gi ya Honolulu, 2400 (dos mit
kuatro sientos) kilumetro gi hayan i kattan Tokyo, 3400 (tres mit kuatro
sientos) kilumetro kattan sanhayan Hong Kong yan 2400 (dos mit kuatro sientos)
kilumetro gi kattan Manila.

Manestaba esta i manChamorru gi islan Guåhån antes di manhalom i Españót gi 1600
na siklo despues di finatton Fetnando Magallanes. Annok gi manatatte na
infotmasión na kasse siña' mås di tres mit kinientos maloffan na tiempo na
manggaige i manChamorru gi kadenan Mariånas låo ti ma tungo' amanu na gaige i
hale'-ñiha pat tinituhon-ñiha este na rasa.



https://ch.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sirena

Åntes na tiempo, guåha un familia mañasaga giya Hagåtña. Guåha lokkue' un
bunitan palao'an gi familia ni na'an-ña si Sirena. Gus ya-ña si Sirena ñumangu,
espesiatmente gi halom i saddok Hagåtña. I nånan Sirena ha sangani gue' na kalan
guihan gue' gi halom hånom.

Åños yan åños maloffan guåha sumåga un palao'an na nå'an-ña si Sirena yan i
familia-ña hihot gi saddok Minondo. Åhe' ti put i guiya mas påtgon yan bunita gi
famagu'on; guiya lokkue' i mas suaben kurason. Lao guåha unu difekto-ña. Ga'o-ña
ñumangu yan humugando kini u cho'gue i che'cho' siha ni tinago' gue' as nåna-ña
para u cho'gue.

Gi Pasgua, ma a'alok, na i mames na sunidon i kampåna siha hohongga påpa' gi
liyang hånom, lineletge minahålang i kurason-ña. Ha tåtånga ñumangu gi saddok
taiguihi anai påpåtgon gue'. Ha mahålangi mamokkat gi chalan i sengsong yan i
amko' yan kulot åpu na guma' Yu'os. Ti ha tungo' na i mañiñila' na kandet gi
me'nan i santa Marian Kamalen para u inina i hinanao-ña tåtte para i lina'la' ni
ginen ha tungo'.



https://ch.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marianas

I Islas Mariånas un kadena ni manmafa'tinas ginen i puntan 15 na botkan, ya
manggaige gi halom i grupon isla siha ni ma'a'agang Micronesia.

I finene'na na taotaogues ni manmåtto para i Mariånas masåsångan na mangginen
Asia mågi na lugat. Siha fuma'tinas i acho' latte siha ni siña un li'e' gi islan
Tini'an, Luta, yan Guåhån.

I finene'na na taotao Uropa ni lumi'e' i Mariånas si Fetnando Magallanes gi dia
6 Matsu 1521. Ha ripara i dos mas yahayaya na isla gi grupo ya lumayak entre i
dos isla, pues ogan Guåhån. Ha diklara na islas España på'go i ha sodda' siha na
isla. Gi sumaga-ña Guåhån, si Magallanes yan i mangga'chong-ña marineru, ma
ayudan maisa siha nu i guinahan i tano' yan maseha håfa ni gaige gi uriya. Pues,
i taotao tåno' ma li'e' lokkue' håfa guinaha-ña si Magallanes ya ma ayudan maisa
siha lokkue' nai håfa gaige gi bapot-ñiha i manestrangheru. Lalålo' si
Magallanes annai ha tungo' este ya ha fa'na'an i islas "Las Islas de los
Ladrones" (I Islas Mansakke), lao gi sakkan 1668 matulaika i na'an para "Las
Marianas" gi onrun Mariana de Austria, bi'udan Felipe IV giya España.

I Ma’estudian i isla tinitihon as Commodore George Anson, taotao Englatera, ni
gi Agosto 1742 ogan gi islan Tini’an.

I Mariånas, lao mas espesifiku i islan Guåhån, ma’usa ni Españot komu
fansugo’-ñiha gi biahen-ñiha ginen Acapulco, Meksiku asta Manila, Filipinas.

Hapon, i membron Triple Entente, ha tutuhon humåtme i islas gi 1914. Annai
manmapetdi Alemaña yan i pumalu na Central Powers gi Primet na Geran i Mundo, i
hagas islas Alemaña manma’entrega ni League of Nations para i Hapones komu
mandate territory (ti parehu yan UN Trust Territory).



https://ch.wikipedia.org/wiki/JS_Bach

Johann Sebastian Bach (Matso 21, 1685 - Hulio 28, 1750) un danderu åtmoniu yan
tituge' musika ginen Alemaña. Makonsidera gue' i mas takhilo' na tituge' musika
gi eran Baroque, ya mandinaña todus na klåsen musika Baroque ni musika-ña.
Kinahulo' i musikan Baroque gi i mas takhilo' na fotma ni musika-ña koru,
musiku, yan instrumento solo. Ti mamaa'tinas gue' nuebu na fotma, lao ha kuttiba
i fotman Aleman kontrapunta (mafana'an gue' i ma'gas kontrapunta), na
guinaguat-ña håtmonia yan otginasion-ña musika ni tairibat-ña, yan i inisan
kompas yan teksturan sanhiyong (tatkomu Italianu yan Frances).

Mientras afamao i nina'siña-ña gi åtmoniu gi lina'la'-ña, ti gus matungo' gue'
kumu tituge' musika. Sa' gus umusa gue' fotman Baroque yan i kontrapunta,
makonsidera gue' "antigu na moda" ni achataotao-ña, espesiatmente gi infin di
ofisinu-ña annai inisa i fotman Rocco (ya despues Klasiku) ni modan musika. Gi i
mina'dies i nuebi na sikglo numa'lo i interes fama'nu'en musika, ya pa'go gus
makonsidera gue' unu ni mas takhilo' na tituge' musika gi kostumbren sanlichan.



https://ch.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bach

Johann Sebastian Bach (Matso 21, 1685 - Hulio 28, 1750) un danderu åtmoniu yan
tituge' musika ginen Alemaña. Makonsidera gue' i mas takhilo' na tituge' musika
gi eran Baroque, ya mandinaña todus na klåsen musika Baroque ni musika-ña.
Kinahulo' i musikan Baroque gi i mas takhilo' na fotma ni musika-ña koru,
musiku, yan instrumento solo. Ti mamaa'tinas gue' nuebu na fotma, lao ha kuttiba
i fotman Aleman kontrapunta (mafana'an gue' i ma'gas kontrapunta), na
guinaguat-ña håtmonia yan otginasion-ña musika ni tairibat-ña, yan i inisan
kompas yan teksturan sanhiyong (tatkomu Italianu yan Frances).

Mientras afamao i nina'siña-ña gi åtmoniu gi lina'la'-ña, ti gus matungo' gue'
kumu tituge' musika. Sa' gus umusa gue' fotman Baroque yan i kontrapunta,
makonsidera gue' "antigu na moda" ni achataotao-ña, espesiatmente gi infin di
ofisinu-ña annai inisa i fotman Rocco (ya despues Klasiku) ni modan musika. Gi i
mina'dies i nuebi na sikglo numa'lo i interes fama'nu'en musika, ya pa'go gus
makonsidera gue' unu ni mas takhilo' na tituge' musika gi kostumbren sanlichan.



https://ch.wikipedia.org/wiki/A%C3%B1u

Såkkan (pat åñu ginen fino'Españot) gi henerat fa'na'an i tiempo entre dos na
susiadet ni umachetton yan i chalan-ña ni ha dibuetta gi atdao. Kumekeilek-ña
lokkue' i tiempon tåtme pat i tiempon kosecha.

Såkkan kalendario (åñu kalendario) kumekeilek-ña i tiempo entre dos na fecha ni
mamarehu nå'an-ñiha.

Åñu feskat kumekeilek-ña i dose na mes siha ni ma'usa para u tåha i kuentan
bisnis pat otganisasion kada såkkan. Manafuetsao i bisnis siha manmafa'tinas
enao na inanokcha kada na 12 mes siha, lao ti afuetsao i åñu feskat tumutuhon gi
principion kalendario. Pot i hemplu, tinituhon gi 1 Oktubre, ni åñu feskat i
gobietnun Estados Unidus, gi 1 Hulio ni åñu feskat Australia, yan gi 1 Abrit ni
åñu feskat Canada.

Ma'usa i eran kalendario para mannå'i numiru gi sakkan, ya marifiri kåsun åntes
na tiempo pot i tinituhon i era. Gi kalendarion Grigorio marifiri i tiempon
mafañagon Jesukristu, i sakkan siha åntes di mafañago-ña (B.C), ya i sakkan siha
despues di mafañago-ña (A.D. ginen Latin anno domini: "gi sakkan Saina-ta").
Pa'go na tiempo guåha na man'u'usa C.E. (fino'Engles: Common Era) yan B.C.E.
(fino'Engles: Before Common Era).



https://ch.wikipedia.org/wiki/Math

Matematika (mafana'an Matematikas pat Math lokkue') i siensan i idean kantidat,
estruktura, kampo, yan tinilaika; kontodu i raman eskuela ni ha estudia
håftaimanu umachetton todus siha na idea. I taotao ni ha estudia Matematika
mafana'an Matematiku.

Guåha na sinangan "i rainan siensa" i Matematika, lao guåha lokkue' taotao ni ti
ma konsidera i Matematika un siensa naturåt. Prinipåtmente, i matematiku siha ma
difina ya ma analisa idean-ñiha para mas ma tungo' i idea—para i adelanton
matematika ha'. Malago'-ñiha tumungo' hafa siña ma sangan an guåha estruktura.
Pot i hemplu, kao guåha nai siña siha mamprueba gi henerat? Meggai lokkue' na
matematiku siha mas ma konsidera i matematika kalan åtte embes di siensa
aplikao. Sinembåtgo, humuyongña siensa naturåt meggai na estruktura ni ma
analisa i matimatiko siha, ya achokka' ti manaligao siha aplikasion, guåha na
biåhi ni ma sodda' aplikasion, meggai na biåhi gi fisika.

Siña ha' mafana'an matemaika i siensan "numiru yan simbolo." Kumekeilek-ña na i
analisan estruktura henerat ni madifina ginen axiom nina'i siha, manu'usa lohika
yan simbolon matematika. I siensan ophetu yan estudiun inachetton-ñiha. Solo ma
usa i sinahguan estruktura para kedanchiyi infotmatsion.

Makonsidera matematika un lengguahe lokkue'. Siña ha' makonsidera matematika un
ekstension lengguahen taotao, ni ha usa un gramatika yan bokabulariu ni madifina
gof espisifiku. Ya i minito'-ña ineksplika yan inaligao i inachetton hinasso yan
fisika ni fino'-ña.



https://ch.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matematikas

Matematika (mafana'an Matematikas pat Math lokkue') i siensan i idean kantidat,
estruktura, kampo, yan tinilaika; kontodu i raman eskuela ni ha estudia
håftaimanu umachetton todus siha na idea. I taotao ni ha estudia Matematika
mafana'an Matematiku.

Guåha na sinangan "i rainan siensa" i Matematika, lao guåha lokkue' taotao ni ti
ma konsidera i Matematika un siensa naturåt. Prinipåtmente, i matematiku siha ma
difina ya ma analisa idean-ñiha para mas ma tungo' i idea—para i adelanton
matematika ha'. Malago'-ñiha tumungo' hafa siña ma sangan an guåha estruktura.
Pot i hemplu, kao guåha nai siña siha mamprueba gi henerat? Meggai lokkue' na
matematiku siha mas ma konsidera i matematika kalan åtte embes di siensa
aplikao. Sinembåtgo, humuyongña siensa naturåt meggai na estruktura ni ma
analisa i matimatiko siha, ya achokka' ti manaligao siha aplikasion, guåha na
biåhi ni ma sodda' aplikasion, meggai na biåhi gi fisika.

Siña ha' mafana'an matemaika i siensan "numiru yan simbolo." Kumekeilek-ña na i
analisan estruktura henerat ni madifina ginen axiom nina'i siha, manu'usa lohika
yan simbolon matematika. I siensan ophetu yan estudiun inachetton-ñiha. Solo ma
usa i sinahguan estruktura para kedanchiyi infotmatsion.

Makonsidera matematika un lengguahe lokkue'. Siña ha' makonsidera matematika un
ekstension lengguahen taotao, ni ha usa un gramatika yan bokabulariu ni madifina
gof espisifiku. Ya i minito'-ña ineksplika yan inaligao i inachetton hinasso yan
fisika ni fino'-ña.



https://ch.wikipedia.org/wiki/Islas_Marianas

I Islas Mariånas un kadena ni manmafa'tinas ginen i puntan 15 na botkan, ya
manggaige gi halom i grupon isla siha ni ma'a'agang Micronesia.

I finene'na na taotaogues ni manmåtto para i Mariånas masåsångan na mangginen
Asia mågi na lugat. Siha fuma'tinas i acho' latte siha ni siña un li'e' gi islan
Tini'an, Luta, yan Guåhån.

I finene'na na taotao Uropa ni lumi'e' i Mariånas si Fetnando Magallanes gi dia
6 Matsu 1521. Ha ripara i dos mas yahayaya na isla gi grupo ya lumayak entre i
dos isla, pues ogan Guåhån. Ha diklara na islas España på'go i ha sodda' siha na
isla. Gi sumaga-ña Guåhån, si Magallanes yan i mangga'chong-ña marineru, ma
ayudan maisa siha nu i guinahan i tano' yan maseha håfa ni gaige gi uriya. Pues,
i taotao tåno' ma li'e' lokkue' håfa guinaha-ña si Magallanes ya ma ayudan maisa
siha lokkue' nai håfa gaige gi bapot-ñiha i manestrangheru. Lalålo' si
Magallanes annai ha tungo' este ya ha fa'na'an i islas "Las Islas de los
Ladrones" (I Islas Mansakke), lao gi sakkan 1668 matulaika i na'an para "Las
Marianas" gi onrun Mariana de Austria, bi'udan Felipe IV giya España.

I Ma’estudian i isla tinitihon as Commodore George Anson, taotao Englatera, ni
gi Agosto 1742 ogan gi islan Tini’an.

I Mariånas, lao mas espesifiku i islan Guåhån, ma’usa ni Españot komu
fansugo’-ñiha gi biahen-ñiha ginen Acapulco, Meksiku asta Manila, Filipinas.

Hapon, i membron Triple Entente, ha tutuhon humåtme i islas gi 1914. Annai
manmapetdi Alemaña yan i pumalu na Central Powers gi Primet na Geran i Mundo, i
hagas islas Alemaña manma’entrega ni League of Nations para i Hapones komu
mandate territory (ti parehu yan UN Trust Territory).



https://ch.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anu

Såkkan (pat åñu ginen fino'Españot) gi henerat fa'na'an i tiempo entre dos na
susiadet ni umachetton yan i chalan-ña ni ha dibuetta gi atdao. Kumekeilek-ña
lokkue' i tiempon tåtme pat i tiempon kosecha.

Såkkan kalendario (åñu kalendario) kumekeilek-ña i tiempo entre dos na fecha ni
mamarehu nå'an-ñiha.

Åñu feskat kumekeilek-ña i dose na mes siha ni ma'usa para u tåha i kuentan
bisnis pat otganisasion kada såkkan. Manafuetsao i bisnis siha manmafa'tinas
enao na inanokcha kada na 12 mes siha, lao ti afuetsao i åñu feskat tumutuhon gi
principion kalendario. Pot i hemplu, tinituhon gi 1 Oktubre, ni åñu feskat i
gobietnun Estados Unidus, gi 1 Hulio ni åñu feskat Australia, yan gi 1 Abrit ni
åñu feskat Canada.

Ma'usa i eran kalendario para mannå'i numiru gi sakkan, ya marifiri kåsun åntes
na tiempo pot i tinituhon i era. Gi kalendarion Grigorio marifiri i tiempon
mafañagon Jesukristu, i sakkan siha åntes di mafañago-ña (B.C), ya i sakkan siha
despues di mafañago-ña (A.D. ginen Latin anno domini: "gi sakkan Saina-ta").
Pa'go na tiempo guåha na man'u'usa C.E. (fino'Engles: Common Era) yan B.C.E.
(fino'Engles: Before Common Era).



https://ch.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ano

Såkkan (pat åñu ginen fino'Españot) gi henerat fa'na'an i tiempo entre dos na
susiadet ni umachetton yan i chalan-ña ni ha dibuetta gi atdao. Kumekeilek-ña
lokkue' i tiempon tåtme pat i tiempon kosecha.

Såkkan kalendario (åñu kalendario) kumekeilek-ña i tiempo entre dos na fecha ni
mamarehu nå'an-ñiha.

Åñu feskat kumekeilek-ña i dose na mes siha ni ma'usa para u tåha i kuentan
bisnis pat otganisasion kada såkkan. Manafuetsao i bisnis siha manmafa'tinas
enao na inanokcha kada na 12 mes siha, lao ti afuetsao i åñu feskat tumutuhon gi
principion kalendario. Pot i hemplu, tinituhon gi 1 Oktubre, ni åñu feskat i
gobietnun Estados Unidus, gi 1 Hulio ni åñu feskat Australia, yan gi 1 Abrit ni
åñu feskat Canada.

Ma'usa i eran kalendario para mannå'i numiru gi sakkan, ya marifiri kåsun åntes
na tiempo pot i tinituhon i era. Gi kalendarion Grigorio marifiri i tiempon
mafañagon Jesukristu, i sakkan siha åntes di mafañago-ña (B.C), ya i sakkan siha
despues di mafañago-ña (A.D. ginen Latin anno domini: "gi sakkan Saina-ta").
Pa'go na tiempo guåha na man'u'usa C.E. (fino'Engles: Common Era) yan B.C.E.
(fino'Engles: Before Common Era).



https://ch.wikipedia.org/wiki/A%C3%B1o

Såkkan (pat åñu ginen fino'Españot) gi henerat fa'na'an i tiempo entre dos na
susiadet ni umachetton yan i chalan-ña ni ha dibuetta gi atdao. Kumekeilek-ña
lokkue' i tiempon tåtme pat i tiempon kosecha.

Såkkan kalendario (åñu kalendario) kumekeilek-ña i tiempo entre dos na fecha ni
mamarehu nå'an-ñiha.

Åñu feskat kumekeilek-ña i dose na mes siha ni ma'usa para u tåha i kuentan
bisnis pat otganisasion kada såkkan. Manafuetsao i bisnis siha manmafa'tinas
enao na inanokcha kada na 12 mes siha, lao ti afuetsao i åñu feskat tumutuhon gi
principion kalendario. Pot i hemplu, tinituhon gi 1 Oktubre, ni åñu feskat i
gobietnun Estados Unidus, gi 1 Hulio ni åñu feskat Australia, yan gi 1 Abrit ni
åñu feskat Canada.

Ma'usa i eran kalendario para mannå'i numiru gi sakkan, ya marifiri kåsun åntes
na tiempo pot i tinituhon i era. Gi kalendarion Grigorio marifiri i tiempon
mafañagon Jesukristu, i sakkan siha åntes di mafañago-ña (B.C), ya i sakkan siha
despues di mafañago-ña (A.D. ginen Latin anno domini: "gi sakkan Saina-ta").
Pa'go na tiempo guåha na man'u'usa C.E. (fino'Engles: Common Era) yan B.C.E.
(fino'Engles: Before Common Era).



