https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Juno_(spacecraft)

Juno is a NASA space probe orbiting the planet Jupiter. It was built by Lockheed
Martin and is operated by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The spacecraft was
launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station on August 5, 2011 (UTC), as part
of the New Frontiers program, and entered a polar orbit of Jupiter on July 5,
2016 (UTC), to begin a scientific investigation of the planet. After completing
its mission, Juno will be intentionally deorbited into Jupiter's atmosphere.

Juno's mission is to measure Jupiter's composition, gravity field, magnetic
field, and polar magnetosphere. It will also search for clues about how the
planet formed, including whether it has a rocky core, the amount of water
present within the deep atmosphere, mass distribution, and its deep winds, which
can reach speeds of 618 kilometers per hour (384 mph).

Juno is the second spacecraft to orbit Jupiter, after the nuclear powered
Galileo orbiter, which orbited from 1995 to 2003. Unlike all earlier spacecraft
to the outer planets, Juno is powered only by solar arrays, commonly used by
satellites orbiting Earth and working in the inner Solar System, whereas
radioisotope thermoelectric generators are commonly used for missions to the
outer Solar System and beyond. For Juno, however, the three largest solar array
wings ever deployed on a planetary probe play an integral role in stabilizing
the spacecraft as well as generating power.

The mission had previously been referred to by the backronym Jupiter Near-polar
Orbiter. Juno is sometimes called New Frontiers 2 as the second mission in the
New Frontiers program, but is not to be confused with New Horizons 2 of the same
program.

Juno was selected in 2005 as the next New Frontiers mission after New Horizons.
The desire for Jupiter was strong in the years prior to this, but there had not
been any approved missions. The Discovery Program had passed over the somewhat
similar but more limited Interior Structure and Internal Dynamical Evolution of
Jupiter (INSIDE Jupiter) proposal, and the turn-of-the-century era Europa
Orbiter was cancelled in 2002. The flagship-level Europa Jupiter System Mission
was in the works in the early 2000s, but funding issues resulted in it evolving
into ESA's Jupiter Icy Moons Explorer.

Juno completed a five-year cruise to Jupiter, arriving on July 5, 2016. The
spacecraft traveled a total distance of roughly 2.8 billion kilometers (18.7
astronomical units; 1.74 billion miles) to reach Jupiter. The spacecraft will
orbit Jupiter 37 times over the course of 20 months. Juno's trajectory used a
gravity assist speed boost from Earth, accomplished by an Earth flyby in October
2013, two years after its launch on August 5, 2011. The spacecraft performed an
orbit insertion burn to slow it enough to allow capture. It will make three
53-day orbits before performing another burn on December 11 that will bring it
into a 14-day polar orbit.

Once in the 14-day orbit, infrared and microwave instruments will begin to
measure the thermal radiation emanating from deep within Jupiter's atmosphere.
These observations will complement previous studies of its composition by
assessing the abundance and distribution of water, and therefore oxygen. This
data will provide insight into Jupiter's origins. Juno will also investigate the
convection that drives natural circulation patterns in Jupiter's atmosphere.
Other instruments aboard Juno will gather data about its gravitational field and
polar magnetosphere. The Juno mission is set to conclude in February 2018, after
completing 37 orbits of Jupiter, when the probe will be de-orbited to burn up in
Jupiter's outer atmosphere, to avoid any possibility of impact and biological
contamination of one of its moons.

Juno was launched atop the Atlas V at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida.
The Atlas V (AV-029) used a Russian-designed and -built RD-180 main engine,
powered by kerosene and liquid oxygen. At ignition it underwent checkout
3.8 seconds prior to the ignition of five strap-on solid rocket boosters (SRBs).
Following SRB burnout, approximately 1 minute 33 seconds into the flight, two of
the spent boosters fell away from the vehicle, followed 1.5 seconds later by the
remaining three. When heating levels had dropped below predetermined limits, the
payload fairing that protected Juno during launch and transit through the
thickest part of the atmosphere separated, about 3 minutes 24 seconds into the
flight. The Atlas V main engine cut off 4 minutes 26 seconds after liftoff.
Sixteen seconds later, the Centaur second stage ignited and burned for
approximately 6 minutes, putting the satellite into an initial parking orbit.
The vehicle coasted for approximately 30 minutes, and then the Centaur was
re-ignited for a second firing of 9 minutes, placing the spacecraft on an Earth
escape trajectory in a heliocentric orbit.

Prior to separation, the Centaur stage used onboard reaction engines to spin
Juno up to 1.4 RPM. About 54 minutes after launch, the spacecraft separated from
the Centaur and began to extend its solar panels. Following the full deployment
and locking of the solar panels, Juno's batteries began to recharge. Deployment
of the solar panels reduced Juno's spin rate by two-thirds. The probe is spun to
ensure stability during the voyage and so that all instruments on the probe are
able to observe Jupiter.

The voyage to Jupiter has taken five years, which included an Earth flyby on
October 10, 2013. On August 12, 2013, Juno had traveled half of its journey to
Jupiter. As it reached the Jovian system, Juno had traveled approximately 19 AU.

After traveling for two years in an elliptical heliocentric orbit, Juno returned
to pass by Earth in October 2013. It used Earth's gravity to help slingshot
itself toward the Jovian system in a maneuver called a gravity assist. The
spacecraft received a boost in speed of more than 3.9 km/s (8,800 mph) and was
set on a course to Jupiter. The flyby was also used as a rehearsal for the Juno
science team to test some instruments and practice certain procedures before the
arrival at Jupiter.

Jupiter's gravity accelerated the approaching spacecraft to around 210,000 km/h
(130,000 mph). On July 5, 2016, between 03:18 and 03:53 UTC Earth-received time,
an insertion burn lasting 2,102 seconds decelerated Juno by 542 m/s (1,780 ft/s)
and changed its trajectory from a hyperbolic flyby to an elliptical, polar orbit
with a period of about 53.5 days. The spacecraft successfully entered Jupiter
orbit on July 5 at 03:53 UTC.

Juno's highly elliptical initial polar orbit takes it within 4,200 kilometers
(2,600 mi) of the planet and out to 8.1 million km (5.0 million mi), far beyond
even Callisto's orbit. An eccentricity-reducing burn, called the Period
Reduction Maneuver, is planned that will drop the probe into a much shorter 14
day science orbit. Juno is expected to complete 37 orbits over 20 months before
the end of its mission.

These orbits minimize contact with Jupiter's dense radiation belts, which can
damage spacecraft electronics and solar panels, by exploiting a gap in the
radiation envelope near the planet, passing through a region of minimal
radiation. The "Juno Radiation Vault", with 1-centimeter-thick titanium walls,
will also aid in protecting Juno's electronics. Despite the intense radiation,
JunoCam and the Jovian Infrared Auroral Mapper (JIRAM) are expected to endure at
least eight orbits, while the Microwave Radiometer (MWR) should endure at least
eleven orbits. Juno will receive much lower levels of radiation in its polar
orbit than the Galileo orbiter received in its equatorial orbit. Galileo was
damaged by radiation during its mission, including an LED diode in its data
recording system.

The spacecraft completed its first flyby of Jupiter (perijove 1) on August 27,
2016, and captured the first-ever images of the planet's north pole.

On October 14, days prior to perijove 2 and the planned Period Reduction
Maneuver, telemetry show that some of Juno's helium valves were not opening
properly. On October 18, 13 hours before its second close approach to Jupiter,
Juno entered into safe mode, an operational mode engaged when its onboard
computer encounters unexpected conditions. The spacecraft powered down all
non-critical systems and reoriented itself to face the Sun to gather the most
power. Due to this, no science operations were conducted during perijove 2.

On December 11, the spacecraft completed perijove 3, with all but one instrument
operating and returning data. One instrument, JIRAM, was off pending a flight
software update. Perijove 4 occurred on February 2, with all instruments
operating. The spacecraft will remain in a 53.4 day orbit for the remainder of
the mission. The next perijove, number 5, will occur on March 27, 2017.

Juno is scheduled to reach the end of the mission during its 37th orbit and
perform a controlled deorbit and disintegrate into Jupiter's atmosphere. During
the mission, the spacecraft will be exposed to high levels of radiation from
Jupiter's magnetosphere, which may cause future failure of certain instruments
and risk collision with Jupiter's moons. The controlled deorbit will eliminate
space debris and risks of contamination in accordance with NASA's Planetary
Protection Guidelines. The procedure will take 5.5 days, during which the
spacecraft will end communications and descend into Jupiter's atmosphere.
Because of the high velocity collision of the spacecraft and the dense
atmosphere, Juno will burn up and disintegrate.

Scott Bolton of the Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, Texas is the
principal investigator and is responsible for all aspects of the mission. The
Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California manages the mission and the Lockheed
Martin Corporation was responsible for the spacecraft development and
construction. The mission is being carried out with the participation of several
institutional partners. Co-investigators include Toby Owen of the University of
Hawaii, Andrew Ingersoll of California Institute of Technology, Frances Bagenal
of the University of Colorado at Boulder, and Candy Hansen of the Planetary
Science Institute. Jack Connerney of the Goddard Space Flight Center served as
instrument lead.

Juno was originally proposed at a cost of approximately US$700 million (fiscal
year 2003) for a launch in June 2009. NASA budgetary restrictions resulted in
postponement until August 2011, and a launch on board an Atlas V rocket in the
551 configuration. As of June 2011[update], the mission was projected to cost
US$1.1 billion over its life.[needs update]

The Juno mission's scientific objectives will be achieved with a payload of nine
instruments on board the spacecraft:

Juno is the first mission to Jupiter to use solar panels instead of the
radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTG) used by Pioneer 10, Pioneer 11, the
Voyager program, Ulysses, Cassini–Huygens, New Horizons, and the Galileo
orbiter. It is also the farthest solar-powered trip in the history of space
exploration. Once in orbit around Jupiter, Juno will receive 4% as much sunlight
as it would on Earth, but the global shortage of Pu-238, as well as advances
made in solar cell technology over the past several decades, makes it
economically preferable to use solar panels of practical size to provide power
at a distance of 5 AU from the Sun.

The Juno spacecraft uses three solar panels symmetrically arranged around the
spacecraft. Shortly after it cleared Earth's atmosphere the panels were
deployed. Two of the panels have four hinged segments each, and the third panel
has three segments and a magnetometer. Each panel is 2.7 by 8.9 meters (8.9 by
29.2 ft) long, the biggest on any NASA deep-space probe.

The combined mass of the three panels is nearly 340 kg (750 lb). If the panels
were optimized to operate at Earth, they would produce 12 to 14 kilowatts of
power. Only about 486 W will be generated when Juno arrives at Jupiter,
declining to near 420 W as radiation degrades the cells. The solar panels will
remain in sunlight continuously from launch through the end of the mission,
except for short periods during the operation of the main engine and eclipses by
Jupiter. A central power distribution and drive unit monitors the power that is
generated by the solar panels, distributes it to instruments, heaters and
experiment sensors as well as batteries that are charged when excess power is
available. Two 55-amp-hour lithium-ion batteries that are able to withstand the
radiation environment of Jupiter will provide power when Juno passes through
eclipse.

Juno uses in-band signaling ("tones") for several critical operations as well as
status reporting during cruise mode, but it is expected to be used infrequently.
Communications are via the 34-metre (112 ft) and 70-metre (230 ft) antennae of
the NASA Deep Space Network (DSN) utilizing an X band direct link. The command
and data processing of the Juno spacecraft includes a flight computer capable of
providing ~50 Mbit/s of instrument throughput. Gravity science subsystems use
the X-band and Ka-band Doppler tracking and autoranging.

Due to telecommunications constraints, Juno will only be able to return about 40
megabytes of JunoCam data during each 11-day orbital period, limiting the number
of images that are captured and transmitted during each orbit to somewhere
between 10 and 100 depending on the compression level used. The overall amount
of data downlinked on each orbit is significantly higher and used for the
mission's scientific instruments; JunoCam is intended for public outreach and is
thus secondary to the science data. This is comparable to the previous Galileo
mission that orbited Jupiter, which captured thousands of images despite its
slow data rate of 1000 bit/s (at maximum compression level) due to the failure
of its high-gain antenna.

The communication system is also used as part of the Gravity Science experiment.

Juno uses a bipropellant LEROS 1b main engine, manufactured by Moog Inc in
Westcott, Buckinghamshire in England. It uses hydrazine and nitrogen tetroxide
for propulsion and provides a thrust of 645 newtons. The engine bell is enclosed
in a debris shield fixed to the spacecraft body, and is used for major burns.
For control of the vehicle's orientation (attitude control) and to perform
trajectory correction maneuvers, Juno utilizes a monopropellant reaction control
system (RCS) consisting of twelve small thrusters that are mounted on four
engine modules.

Juno carries a plaque to Jupiter, dedicated to Galileo Galilei. The plaque was
provided by the Italian Space Agency and measures 7.1 by 5.1 centimeters (2.8 by
2.0 in). It is made of flight-grade aluminum and weighs 6 grams (0.21 oz). The
plaque depicts a portrait of Galileo and a text in Galileo's own hand, penned in
January 1610, while observing what would later be known to be the Galilean
moons. The text translates as:

The spacecraft also carries three Lego minifigures representing Galileo, the
Roman god Jupiter, and his sister and wife, the goddess Juno. In Roman
mythology, Jupiter drew a veil of clouds around himself to hide his mischief.
Juno was able to peer through the clouds and reveal Jupiter's true nature. The
Juno minifigure holds a magnifying glass as a sign of searching for the truth,
and Jupiter holds a lightning bolt. The third Lego crew member, Galileo Galilei,
has his telescope with him on the journey. The figurines were produced in
partnership between NASA and Lego as part of an outreach program to inspire
children's interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM).
Although most Lego toys are made of plastic, Lego specially made these
minifigures of aluminum to endure the extreme conditions of space flight.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UEFA_Euro_2016

The 2016 UEFA European Championship, commonly referred to as UEFA Euro 2016 or
simply Euro 2016, was the 15th UEFA European Championship, the quadrennial
international men's football championship of Europe organised by UEFA. It was
held in France from 10 June to 10 July 2016. Spain were the two-time defending
champions, having won the 2008 and 2012 tournaments, but were eliminated in the
round of 16 by Italy. Portugal won the tournament for the first time, following
a 1–0 victory after extra time over the host team, France, in the final played
at the Stade de France.

For the first time, the European Championship final tournament was contested by
24 teams, having been expanded from the 16-team format used since 1996. Under
the new format, the finalists contested a group stage consisting of six groups
of four teams, followed by a knockout phase including three rounds and the
final. Nineteen teams – the top two from each of the nine qualifying groups and
the best third-placed team – joined France in the final tournament, who
qualified automatically as hosts; a series of two-legged play-off ties between
the remaining third-placed teams in November 2015 decided the last four finalist
spots.

France was chosen as the host nation on 28 May 2010, after a bidding process in
which they beat Italy and Turkey for the right to host the 2016 finals. The
matches were played in ten stadiums in ten cities: Bordeaux, Lens, Lille
Métropole, Décines-Charpieu, Marseille, Nice, Paris, Saint-Denis, Saint-Étienne,
and Toulouse. It was the third time that France hosted the finals, after the
inaugural tournament in 1960 and the 1984 finals.

As the winners, Portugal earned the right to compete at the 2017 FIFA
Confederations Cup in Russia.

Four bids came before the deadline on 9 March 2009. France, Italy and Turkey put
in single bids while Norway and Sweden put in a joint bid. Norway and Sweden
eventually withdrew their bid in December 2009.

The qualifying draw took place at the Palais des Congrès Acropolis in Nice, on
23 February 2014, with the first matches being played in September 2014.

A total of 53 teams competed for 23 places in the final tournament to join
France, who have automatically qualified as hosts. Gibraltar competed in a
European Championship qualifying for the first time since their affiliation to
UEFA in 2013. The seeding pots were formed on the basis of the UEFA national
team coefficients, with the Euro 2012 champions Spain and hosts France
automatically top seeded.

The 53 national sides were drawn into eight groups of six teams and one group of
five teams. The group winners, runners-up, and the best third-placed team (with
the results against the sixth-placed team discarded) qualify directly for the
final tournament. The remaining eight third-placed teams contested two-legged
play-offs to determine the last four qualifiers.

In March 2012, Gianni Infantino, the UEFA General Secretary at the time, stated
that UEFA would review the qualification competition to ensure that it was not
"boring". In September 2011, during UEFA's first ever full strategy meeting,
Michel Platini proposed a qualification format involving two group stages, but
the proposal was not accepted by the member associations. In May 2013, Platini
confirmed a similar qualifying format would be again discussed during the
September 2013 UEFA executive committee meeting in Dubrovnik.

Thirteen of the sixteen teams (including hosts France) that qualified for Euro
2012 qualified again for the 2016 final tournament. Among them were England, who
became only the sixth team to record a flawless qualifying campaign (10 wins in
10 matches), defending European champions Spain, and world champions Germany,
who qualified for their 12th straight European Championship finals.

Romania, Turkey, Austria and Switzerland all returned after missing out in 2012,
with the Austrians qualifying for just their second final Euro tournament, after
having co-hosted Euro 2008. Returning to the final tournament after long
absences were Belgium for the first time since co-hosting Euro 2000, and Hungary
for the first time in 44 years, having last appeared at Euro 1972, and 30 years
since appearing in a major tournament, their previous one being the 1986 FIFA
World Cup.

Five teams secured their first-ever qualification to a UEFA European
Championship final tournament: Albania, Iceland, Northern Ireland, Slovakia and
Wales. Northern Ireland, Slovakia and Wales had each previously competed in the
FIFA World Cup, while Albania and Iceland had never participated in a major
tournament. Similarly, both Austria and Ukraine completed successful
qualification campaigns for the first time, having only previously qualified as
hosts (of 2008 and 2012 respectively).

Scotland were the only team from the British Isles not to qualify for the
finals, and 2004 champions Greece finished bottom in their group. Two other
previous champions, the Netherlands (1988) and Denmark (1992), missed out on the
finals. The Dutch team failed to qualify for the first time since Euro 1984
(also held in France), missing out on their first major tournament since the
2002 FIFA World Cup and only 16 months after having finished third at the 2014
FIFA World Cup. Denmark did not appear at the Euro finals for the first time
since 2008, after losing in the play-off round against Sweden.

The draw for the finals took place at the Palais des Congrès de la Porte Maillot
in Paris on 12 December 2015, 18:00 CET. The 24 qualified teams were drawn into
six groups of four teams, with the hosts France being automatically placed in
position A1. The remaining teams were seeded into four pots of five (Pot 1) or
six teams (Pots 2, 3 and 4). As the title holders, Spain were seeded in Pot 1,
while the other 22 teams were seeded according to the UEFA National team
coefficients updated after the completion of the qualifying group stage
(excluding the play-offs), which were released by UEFA on 14 October 2015.

Ten stadiums were used for the competition. Initially, twelve stadiums were
presented for the French bid, chosen on 28 May 2010. These venues were to be
whittled down to nine by the end of May 2011, but it was suggested in June 2011
that eleven venues might be used. The French Football Federation had to choose
which nine would actually be used.

The choice for the first seven was undisputed – the national Stade de France,
four newly constructed ones in Lille Metropole (Villeneuve-d'Ascq),
Décines-Charpieu, Nice and Bordeaux, and two stadiums in the two largest cities,
Paris and Marseille. After Strasbourg opted out for financial reasons following
relegation, two more venues were selected to be Lens and Nancy, leaving
Saint-Étienne and Toulouse as reserve options.

In June 2011, the number of host venues was increased to eleven due to the new
tournament format featuring 24 teams, instead of the previous 16. The decision
meant that the reserve cities of Toulouse and St-Étienne joined the list of
hosts. Then, in December 2011, Nancy announced its withdrawal from the
tournament, after plans for the stadium's renovation were cancelled, finalising
the list of host venues at ten.

Two other possible options, the Stade de la Beaujoire in Nantes and the Stade de
la Mosson in Montpellier (venues which were used for the 1998 World Cup) were
not chosen. The final list was confirmed by the UEFA Executive Committee on 25
January 2013.

Note: Capacity figures are those for matches at UEFA Euro 2016 and are not
necessarily the total capacity that the stadium is capable of holding.

Each team had a "team base camp" for its stay between the matches. The teams
trained and resided in these locations throughout the tournament, travelling to
games staged away from their bases. From an initial list of 66 bases, the 24
participating teams had to confirm their selection with UEFA by 31 January 2016.

To accommodate the expansion from a 16-team finals tournament to 24 teams, the
format was changed from that used in 2012 with the addition of two extra groups
in the group stage, and an extra round in the knockout phases. The six groups (A
to F) still contained four teams each, with the top two from each group still
going through to the knockout phase. In the new format, however, the four best
third-ranked sides also progress, leaving 16 teams going into the new
round-of-16 knockout phases, ahead of the usual quarter-finals, semi-finals and
final, and only 8 teams going out at the group stage. The format is exactly the
one which was applied to the 1986, 1990 and 1994 FIFA World Cups, except for the
absence of a third-place play-off.

This format generates a total of 51 games, compared with 31 games for the
previous 16-team tournament, to be played over a period of 31 days. UEFA's
general secretary Gianni Infantino previously described the format as "not
ideal" due to the need for third-ranked teams in the group stage advancing,
leading to difficulty in preventing situations where teams might be able to know
in advance what results they need to progress out of the group, leading to a
lack of suspense for fans, or even the prospect of mutually beneficial collusion
between teams.

Each national team had to submit a squad of 23 players, three of whom must be
goalkeepers, at least ten days before the opening match of the tournament. If a
player became injured or ill severely enough to prevent his participation in the
tournament before his team's first match, he would be replaced by another
player.

On 15 December 2015, UEFA named eighteen referees for Euro 2016. The full
referee teams were announced on 1 March 2016.

Hungarian referee Viktor Kassai was chosen to officiate the opener between
France and Romania.

Two match officials, who serve only as fourth officials, and two reserve
assistant referees were also named:

UEFA announced the tournament schedule on 25 April 2014, which was confirmed on
12 December 2015, after the final draw.

Group winners, runners-up, and the best four third-placed teams advanced to the
Round of 16.

If two or more teams were equal on points on completion of the group matches,
the following tie-breaking criteria would be applied:

The four best third-placed teams were determined according to the following
criteria:

In the knockout phase, extra time and a penalty shoot-out were used to decide
the winner if necessary.

The UEFA Technical Team was given the objective of naming a team of 11 players
during the tournament, a change from the 23-man squads in the past competitions.
The group of analysts watched every game before making the decision following
the final. Four players from the winning Portuguese squad were named in the
tournament.

The Player of the Tournament award was given to Antoine Griezmann, who was
chosen by UEFA's technical observers, led by UEFA chief technical officer Ioan
Lupescu and including Sir Alex Ferguson and Alain Giresse.

The Young Player of the Tournament award, open to players born on or after 1
January 1994, was given to Renato Sanches who was named above Kingsley Coman and
Portugal teammate Raphaël Guerreiro. The particular player, who deserved the
award, was also chosen by UEFA's technical observers.

The Golden Boot was awarded to Antoine Griezmann, who scored one goal in the
group stage and five in the knockout phase.

The Silver Boot was awarded to Cristiano Ronaldo, who scored two goals in the
group stage and one in the knockout phase, as well as providing three assists.

The Bronze Boot was awarded to Olivier Giroud, who scored one goal in the group
stage and two in the knockout phase, as well as providing two assists;
compatriot Dimitri Payet amassed the same tally, but played 50 more minutes than
Giroud.

The Goal of the Tournament was decided by online voting. A total 5 goals were in
the shortlist. On 13 July 2016, after an open vote with over 150,000 entries,
UEFA announced that Hungarian midfielder Zoltán Gera's goal against Portugal had
been named as fans' goal of the tournament. In a separate poll, UEFA's technical
observers decided that Swiss winger Xherdan Shaqiri's goal against Poland
deserved top spot in their list of the ten best goals of the tournament.

A total of €301 million was distributed to the 24 teams contesting in the
tournament, a growth from the €196 million payment in the preceding event. Each
team was rewarded €8 million, with further rewards depending on their
performances. Portugal, the champions of the competition, were awarded €8
million in addition to any prize money earned in earlier rounds – the biggest
prize attainable was €27 million (for winning all group matches and the final).

A player is automatically suspended for the next match for the following
offences:

Pre-tournament concerns included heavy flooding of the River Seine in Paris, and
strikes in the transport sector shortly before the beginning of the event.

Following the attacks on Paris on 13 November 2015, including one in which the
intended target was a game at the Stade de France, controversies about the
safety of players and tourists during the upcoming tournament arose. Noël Le
Graët, president of the French Football Federation, explained that the concern
for security had increased following the attacks. He claimed: "there was already
a concern for the Euros, now it's obviously a lot higher. We will continue to do
everything we can so that security is assured despite all the risks that this
entails. I know that everyone is vigilant. Obviously, this means that we will
now be even more vigilant. But it's a permanent concern for the federation and
the [French] state".

A "suspicious vehicle" near the Stade de France was destroyed by a
police-mandated controlled explosion on 3 July, hours before the venue held the
quarter-final between France and Iceland.

The day before the tournament, fighting broke out between local youths and
England fans in Marseille; police dispersed the local youths with tear gas. On
10 June, English fans at Marseille clashed with police. Six English fans were
later arrested and sentenced to prison. On 11 June, violent clashes erupted in
the streets of the same city before and after the Group B match between England
and Russia that ended in a 1–1 draw. One English fan was reported to be
critically ill in the hospital while dozens of others were injured in the
clashes. On 14 June, the Russian team were given a suspended disqualification,
fined €150,000, and warned that future violence would result in their removal
from the cup. Additionally, 50 Russian fans were deported. The English team was
also warned about disqualification, but was not formally charged. Violence
between English and Russian fans arose again in Lille, where a total of 36 fans
were arrested, and 16 people were hospitalised.

Late in the Group D match between the Czech Republic and Croatia, flares were
thrown onto the pitch from where Croatia supporters were massed. The match was
paused for several minutes while they were cleared up. There was also fighting
in the Croatia supporters' area. Later that same day, there was violence
involving Turkish fans after Turkey's defeat by Spain. As a result of these
incidents and earlier crowd troubles after the countries' first matches, UEFA
launched official procedures against the Croatian and Turkish football
federations. The Croatian federation was fined €100,000 for the incidents.

The football pitches at French stadiums were criticized during the group stage
for their poor quality. France coach Didier Deschamps was especially critical.
UEFA tournament director Martin Kallen blamed heavy rain for damaged turf,
though the press speculated that non-football events may have also been a
contributor.

The pitch at Lille received particular attention with players slipping
continuously and with groundsmen forced at halftime to try and repair the cut up
pitch. Despite UEFA applying numerous methods to rectify the problems, such as a
ban on pre-match training on the pitch, use of fertilisers, seeding, mowing,
light therapy, drying and playing with the roof closed to avoid rain, it was
decided that the pitch at Lille had to be entirely replaced following the
Italy–Republic of Ireland group match on 22 June. The new pitch was replaced
with Dutch grass and was ready before the last sixteen match between Germany and
Slovakia on 26 June. UEFA also stated that repair work was also required at the
St Denis and Marseille pitches.

UEFA's Leeds-based consultant Richard Hayden had come under criticism as it was
reported he ordered local groundsmen to re-lay three pitches (Lille, Nice, and
Marseille) with Slovak grass, provided by an Austrian company for an estimated
€600,000 (£460,000). On 22 June it was reported that France's grass association
officials had blamed Hayden for continued problems with the pitches, citing "it
is amazing that it is only these pitches that have problems today". In a
statement, UEFA rejected the criticism against Hayden as baseless and stated
they were satisfied with his work.

Before the final match started, the stadium was invaded by Silver Y moths, which
caused some irritation to the players, staff and coaches. The reason this
occurred is because the workers at the stadium left the lights switched on the
day before the match which attracted huge swaths of insects. The players and
coaches of each team during the warm-up tried swatting the moths, and ground
staff used brushes to clean moths from the walls, ground and other areas. One
moth was infamously captured flying on and around Cristiano Ronaldo's face when
he began crying after being injured during the match.

The UEFA Euro 2016 video game was released by Konami as a free DLC on Pro
Evolution Soccer 2016. The DLC was available for existing Pro Evolution Soccer
2016 members on 24 March 2016 for major platforms (PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4,
Xbox 360, Xbox One and Microsoft Windows). The game was released physically and
digitally on 21 April for PlayStation 3 and PlayStation 4 users.

The official logo was unveiled on 26 June 2013, during a ceremony at the
Pavillon Cambon Capucines in Paris. Conceived by Portuguese agency Brandia
Central, which also created the visual identity for the previous European
Championship, the design is based on the theme "Celebrating the art of
football". The logo depicts the Henri Delaunay trophy with the blue, white and
red colours of the French flag, surrounded by a mixture of shapes and lines
representing different artistic movements and football elements.

On 17 October 2013, UEFA announced the official slogan of the tournament: Le
Rendez-Vous. Asked about its meaning, Jacques Lambert, chairman of the Euro 2016
organising committee, told that the slogan "is much more than a reminder of
dates (...) and venues". He further explained that "UEFA is sending out an
invitation to football fans throughout the world and to lovers of major events,
an invitation to meet up and share the emotions of an elite-level tournament".

For the first time in the tournament's history, two official match balls were
used. The Adidas Beau Jeu, used for the group stage, was unveiled on 12 November
2015 by former France player Zinedine Zidane. During the tournament, the Adidas
Fracas was introduced as the exclusive match ball for the knockout rounds.

The official mascot of the tournament, Super Victor, was unveiled on 18 November
2014. He is a child superhero in the kit of the France national football team,
with a red cape at the back, to echo the colours of the flag of France. The
cape, boots and ball are claimed to be the child's superpowers. The mascot first
appeared during the match between France and Sweden at the Stade Vélodrome,
Marseille on 18 November 2014. The name of the mascot was revealed on 30
November 2014 after receiving about 50,000 votes from the public on the official
UEFA website, beating the other nominated names of "Driblou" and "Goalix". It is
based on the idea of victory and references the boy's super powers that he
gained when he found the magic cape, boots and ball.

The name of the mascot is the same as the name of a sex toy. UEFA said that this
'coincidence' was not their responsibility because the name was selected by fan
voting.

The competition's official opening song was "This One's for You" by David Guetta
featuring Zara Larsson, and the official closing song was "Free Your Mind" by
Maya Lavelle. It was reported that David Guetta sought one million fans to add
their voices to the official anthem via a website.

The International Broadcast Centre (IBC) is located at the Paris expo Porte de
Versailles in Paris' 15th arrondissement.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Burger_King_(Mattoon,_Illinois)

Burger King is a restaurant founded by the Hoots family and operated by Burger
King LLC of Illinois in Mattoon, Illinois, United States; it is not related to
the fast food chain Burger King. The restaurant's founders claim it is the
"original" Burger King and predates the fast food chain. A 1968 court case
between this restaurant and the larger Burger King chain is a well-known case in
United States trademark law regarding the Lanham Act.

Mattoon residents Gene and Betty Hoots bought the successful Frigid Queen ice
cream shop from Gene's uncle, Bill Paullin, in 1952. In 1954, Gene expanded the
business, adding hamburgers, French fries and other items to the menu. In 1957,
they fixed up a two-car parking garage behind the Frigid Queen, adding a grill
and a counter for customers. When it came time to give the new business behind
the Frigid Queen a name, Gene wanted to go with The Hot Dames but Betty said
that a queen needs a king, and chose the name Burger King instead.

In 1959, after prompting by his uncle, Gene registered the name "Burger King" as
a state trademark in Illinois, and the Hootses were official owners and
operators of the only "Burger King" restaurant in Illinois at the time.

The Hoots retired in February 2015 and sold the company to a local businessman,
Cory Sanders. Sanders announced he would continue to operate the restaurant but
would be making several changes including a planned remodel of the interior,
menu expansion and price reductions. He also said he intends to host car shows,
fundraisers for local charities, and increase web and social media presence of
the restaurant.

Things went smoothly for the business for several years until the Hootses
learned of the Burger King in Florida and that company's plans for Illinois. The
Hootses and their lawyer thought their state trademark, which was in use before
the Florida chain moved into the state, gave them exclusive rights to the
"Burger King" name all over the state. However, the Florida chain opened its
first Illinois restaurant in Skokie in 1961; by 1967, the chain had 50
restaurants in Illinois, and the Hootses felt they needed to take action.

The Hootses filed suit in state court, and the Florida company responded with a
federal suit: Burger King of Florida, Inc. v. Hoots (1968). The Hootses had
attorney Harlan Heller of Mattoon whereas the president of the Burger King of
Florida appeared with at least six lawyers, according to Betty Hoots. The case
went to the federal 7th Circuit Court of Appeals, whose decision still stands as
an important interpretation of the Lanham Act.

The court ruled that, because of the federal trademark registration, and because
the federal law indicated priority over state law, Florida's Burger King had
rights to the name almost everywhere in the United States, including in
Illinois, except in the Mattoon area, where the Hoots family had prior actual
use. As a result of the case, the Hootses cannot use the name "Burger King"
outside of the Mattoon area, and the Florida chain cannot use the name in the
Mattoon area. The district court had previously decided that the Mattoon market
area was a circle with a radius of 20 miles (32 km) and centered on the Hootses'
restaurant. Thus, the closest Burger King for the Florida chain is located
approximately 25 miles (40 km) north of Mattoon in Tuscola, Illinois. As of
2012, the Florida chain has 319 locations in Illinois outside the 20-mile
Mattoon area.

Betty Hoots said that Burger King Corp. offered the Hootses $10,000 for the
right to operate a Burger King restaurant within the 20 mile Mattoon area, but
the Hootses declined.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Independence_Day_(United_States)

Independence Day of the United States, also referred to as the Fourth of July or
July Fourth in the U.S., is a federal holiday commemorating the adoption of the
Declaration of Independence 241 years ago in 1776 on July 4 by the Continental
Congress. It declared that the thirteen American colonies regarded themselves as
a new nation, the United States of America, and were no longer part of the
British Empire.

Independence Day is commonly associated with fireworks, parades, barbecues,
carnivals, fairs, picnics, concerts, baseball games, family reunions, and
political speeches and ceremonies, in addition to various other public and
private events celebrating the history, government, and traditions of the United
States. Independence Day is the National Day of the United States.

During the American Revolution, the legal separation of the Thirteen Colonies
from Great Britain in 1776 actually occurred on July 2, when the Second
Continental Congress voted to approve a resolution of independence that had been
proposed in June by Richard Henry Lee of Virginia declaring the United States
independent from Great Britain rule. After voting for independence, Congress
turned its attention to the Declaration of Independence, a statement explaining
this decision, which had been prepared by a Committee of Five, with Thomas
Jefferson as its principal author. Congress debated and revised the wording of
the Declaration, finally approving it two days later on July 4. A day earlier,
John Adams had written to his wife Abigail:

Adams's prediction was off by two days. From the outset, Americans celebrated
independence on July 4, the date shown on the much-publicized Declaration of
Independence, rather than on July 2, the date the resolution of independence was
approved in a closed session of Congress.

Historians have long disputed whether members of Congress signed the Declaration
of Independence on July 4, even though Thomas Jefferson, John Adams, and
Benjamin Franklin all later wrote that they had signed it on that day. Most
historians have concluded that the Declaration was signed nearly a month after
its adoption, on August 2, 1776, and not on July 4 as is commonly believed.

Coincidentally, both John Adams and Thomas Jefferson, the only signers of the
Declaration of Independence later to serve as Presidents of the United States,
died on the same day: July 4, 1826, which was the 50th anniversary of the
Declaration. Although not a signer of the Declaration of Independence, James
Monroe, another Founding Father who was elected as President, also died on July
4, 1831. He was the third President in a row who died on the anniversary of
independence. Calvin Coolidge, the 30th President, was born on July 4, 1872; so
far he is the only U.S. President to have been born on Independence Day.

Independence Day is a national holiday marked by patriotic displays. Similar to
other summer-themed events, Independence Day celebrations often take place
outdoors. Independence Day is a federal holiday, so all non-essential federal
institutions (such as the postal service and federal courts) are closed on that
day. Many politicians make it a point on this day to appear at a public event to
praise the nation's heritage, laws, history, society, and people.

Families often celebrate Independence Day by hosting or attending a picnic or
barbecue; many take advantage of the day off and, in some years, a long weekend
to gather with relatives or friends. Decorations (e.g., streamers, balloons, and
clothing) are generally colored red, white, and blue, the colors of the American
flag. Parades are often held in the morning, before family get-togethers, while
fireworks displays occur in the evening after dark at such places as parks,
fairgrounds, or town squares.

The night before the Fourth was once the focal point of celebrations, marked by
raucous gatherings often incorporating bonfires as their centerpiece. In New
England, towns competed to build towering pyramids, assembled from barrels and
casks. They were lit at nightfall, to usher in the celebration. The highest were
in Salem, Massachusetts (on Gallows Hill, the famous site of the execution of 13
women and 6 men for witchcraft in 1692 during the Salem witch trials), where the
tradition of celebratory bonfires had persisted, with pyramids composed of as
many as forty tiers of barrels. These made the tallest bonfires ever recorded.
The custom flourished in the 19th and 20th centuries, and is still practiced in
some New England towns.

Independence Day fireworks are often accompanied by patriotic songs such as the
national anthem "The Star-Spangled Banner,", "God Bless America,", "America the
Beautiful," "My Country, 'Tis of Thee," "This Land Is Your Land," "Stars and
Stripes Forever," and, regionally, "Yankee Doodle" in northeastern states and
"Dixie" in southern states. Some of the lyrics recall images of the
Revolutionary War or the War of 1812.

A salute of one gun for each state in the United States, called a "salute to the
union," is fired on Independence Day at noon by any capable military base.

In 2009, New York City had the largest fireworks display in the country, with
more than 22 tons of pyrotechnics exploded. It generally holds displays in the
East River. Other major displays are in Chicago on Lake Michigan; in San Diego
over Mission Bay; in Boston on the Charles River; in St. Louis on the
Mississippi River; in San Francisco over the San Francisco Bay; and on the
National Mall in Washington, D.C.

During the annual Windsor-Detroit International Freedom Festival, Detroit,
Michigan hosts one of the world's largest fireworks displays, over the Detroit
River, to celebrate Independence Day in conjunction with Windsor, Ontario's
celebration of Canada Day.

The first week of July is typically one of the busiest United States travel
periods of the year, as many people use what is often a 3-day holiday weekend
for extended vacation trips.

The Philippines celebrates July 4 as its Republic Day to commemorate that day in
1946 when it ceased to be a U.S. territory and the United States officially
recognized Philippine Independence. July 4 was intentionally chosen by the
United States because it corresponds to its Independence Day, and this day was
observed in the Philippines as Independence Day until 1962. In 1964, the name of
the July 4 holiday was changed to Republic Day. In Rwanda, July 4 is an official
holiday known as Liberation Day, commemorating the end of the 1994 Rwandan
Genocide in which the U.S. government also played a role. A national park in
Denmark is said to hold the largest July 4 celebrations outside of the United
States.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Megan_Brennan

Megan Jane Brennan (born 1961[citation needed]) is the Postmaster General of the
United States. The seventy-fourth postmaster general, Brennan became the first
woman to hold the office when she assumed the position on February 1, 2015.

A native of Pottsville, Pennsylvania, Brennan attended Nativity BVM High School
there, where she played softball and basketball and was on the 1978 state
championship basketball team. After graduating in 1980, she attended Immaculata
College near Philadelphia, graduating in 1984 with a B.A. in history. Brennan is
of Irish descent.

Brennan's late brother worked in their hometown Pottsville post office until he
died in 2013.

She began her career with the U.S. Postal Service (USPS) in 1986 as a letter
carrier in Lancaster, Pennsylvania. She subsequently worked as a delivery and
collection supervisor, a processing plant manager in Reading and the Lehigh
Valley in Pennsylvania, and a district manager in Springfield, Massachusetts.

Brennan stepped away from the USPS for a year to study as a Sloan Fellow at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Following that hiatus, she served as
manager of field support and integration and manager of operations support for
the Northeast Area. In May 2005 she was named vice president for the Northeast
Area, where she coordinated and integrated processing and distribution,
transportation and delivery operations in that region. Brennan was then named
vice president of Eastern Area Operations, putting her in charge of postal
operations in the states of Pennsylvania, Ohio, West Virginia, Delaware,
Kentucky, Central and South Jersey, Western New York and parts of Virginia and
Indiana. In December 2010, she was named chief operating officer and executive
vice president of the USPS. In 2012, she began shutting down mail-handling
facilities because of budget cuts brought on by less mail and
Congressionally-mandated pension funding rules.

On November 14, 2014, the U.S. Postal Service's Board of Governors voted to
appoint Brennan postmaster general, to succeed Patrick R. Donahoe, who was set
to retire in February 2015.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Earth

Earth (Greek: Γαῖα Gaia;[n 5] Latin: Terra), otherwise known as the world
(especially in geopolitics and geography),[n 6] is the third planet from the Sun
and the only object in the Universe known to harbor life. It is the densest
planet in the Solar System and the largest of the four terrestrial planets.

According to radiometric dating and other sources of evidence, Earth formed
about 4.54 billion years ago. Earth's gravity interacts with other objects in
space, especially the Sun and the Moon, Earth's only natural satellite. During
one orbit around the Sun, Earth rotates about its axis over 365 times; thus, an
Earth year is about 365.26 days long.[n 7] Earth's axis of rotation is tilted,
producing seasonal variations on the planet's surface. The gravitational
interaction between the Earth and Moon causes ocean tides, stabilizes the
Earth's orientation on its axis, and gradually slows its rotation.

Earth's lithosphere is divided into several rigid tectonic plates that migrate
across the surface over periods of many millions of years. About 71% of Earth's
surface is covered with water, mostly by its oceans. The remaining 29% is land
consisting of continents and islands that together have many lakes, rivers and
other sources of water that contribute to the hydrosphere. The majority of
Earth's polar regions are covered in ice, including the Antarctic ice sheet and
the sea ice of the Arctic ice pack. Earth's interior remains active with a solid
iron inner core, a liquid outer core that generates the Earth's magnetic field,
and a convecting mantle that drives plate tectonics.

Within the first billion years of Earth's history, life appeared in the oceans
and began to affect the Earth's atmosphere and surface, leading to the
proliferation of aerobic and anaerobic organisms. Some geological evidence
indicates that life may have arisen as much as 4.1 billion years ago. Since
then, the combination of Earth's distance from the Sun, physical properties, and
geological history have allowed life to evolve and thrive. In the history of the
Earth, biodiversity has gone through long periods of expansion, occasionally
punctuated by mass extinction events. Over 99% of all species that ever lived on
Earth are extinct. Estimates of the number of species on Earth today vary
widely; most species have not been described. Over 7.4 billion humans live on
Earth and depend on its biosphere and minerals for their survival. Humans have
developed diverse societies and cultures; politically, the world has about 200
sovereign states.

The modern English word Earth developed from a wide variety of Middle English
forms,[n 8] which derived from an Old English noun most often spelled eorðe. It
has cognates in every Germanic language, and their proto-Germanic root has been
reconstructed as *erþō. In its earliest appearances, eorðe was already being
used to translate the many senses of Latin terra and Greek γῆ (gē): the
ground,[n 9] its soil,[n 10] dry land,[n 11] the human world,[n 12] the surface
of the world (including the sea),[n 13] and the globe itself.[n 14] As with
Terra and Gaia, Earth was a personified goddess in Germanic paganism: the Angles
were listed by Tacitus as among the devotees of Nerthus, and later Norse
mythology included Jörð, a giantess often given as the mother of Thor.

Originally, earth was written in lowercase, and from early Middle English, its
definite sense as "the globe" was expressed as the earth. By early Modern
English, many nouns were capitalized, and the earth became (and often remained)
the Earth, particularly when referenced along with other heavenly bodies. More
recently, the name is sometimes simply given as Earth, by analogy with the names
of the other planets. House styles now vary: Oxford spelling recognizes the
lowercase form as the most common, with the capitalized form an acceptable
variant. Another convention capitalizes "Earth" when appearing as a name (e.g.
"Earth's atmosphere") but writes it in lowercase when preceded by the (e.g. "the
atmosphere of the earth"). It almost always appears in lowercase in colloquial
expressions such as "what on earth are you doing?"

The oldest material found in the Solar System is dated to
7000456720000000000♠4.5672±0.0006 billion years ago (Gya). By
7000454000000000000♠4.54±0.04 Gya the primordial Earth had formed. The formation
and evolution of Solar System bodies occurred along with the Sun. In theory, a
solar nebula partitions a volume out of a molecular cloud by gravitational
collapse, which begins to spin and flatten into a circumstellar disk, and then
the planets grow out of that disk along with the Sun. A nebula contains gas, ice
grains, and dust (including primordial nuclides). According to nebular theory,
planetesimals formed by accretion, with the primordial Earth taking
10–7001200000000000000♠20 million years (Ma) to form.

A subject of on-going research is the formation of the Moon, some 4.53 billion
years ago. A working hypothesis is that it was formed by accretion from material
loosed from Earth after a Mars-sized object, named Theia, impacted Earth. In
this scenario, the mass of Theia was approximately 10% of that of Earth, it
impacted Earth with a glancing blow, and some of its mass merged with Earth.
Between approximately 4.1 and 7000380000000000000♠3.8 Gya, numerous asteroid
impacts during the Late Heavy Bombardment caused significant changes to the
greater surface environment of the Moon, and by inference, to that of Earth.

Earth's atmosphere and oceans were formed by volcanic activity and outgassing
that included water vapor. The origin of the world's oceans was condensation
augmented by water and ice delivered by asteroids, protoplanets, and comets. In
this model, atmospheric "greenhouse gases" kept the oceans from freezing when
the newly forming Sun had only 70% of its current luminosity. By
7000350000000000000♠3.5 Gya, Earth's magnetic field was established, which
helped prevent the atmosphere from being stripped away by the solar wind.

A crust formed when the molten outer layer of Earth cooled to form a solid. The
two models that explain land mass propose either a steady growth to the
present-day forms or, more likely, a rapid growth early in Earth history
followed by a long-term steady continental area. Continents formed by plate
tectonics, a process ultimately driven by the continuous loss of heat from
Earth's interior. On time scales lasting hundreds of millions of years, the
supercontinents have assembled and broken apart. Roughly
7002750000000000000♠750 Mya (million years ago), one of the earliest known
supercontinents, Rodinia, began to break apart. The continents later recombined
to form Pannotia, 600–7002540000000000000♠540 Mya, then finally Pangaea, which
also broke apart 7002180000000000000♠180 Mya.

The present pattern of ice ages began about 7001400000000000000♠40 Mya and then
intensified during the Pleistocene about 7000300000000000000♠3 Mya.
High-latitude regions have since undergone repeated cycles of glaciation and
thaw, repeating about every 40,000–7012315576000000000♠100000 years. The last
continental glaciation ended 10,000 years ago.

Chemical reactions led to the first self-replicating molecules about four
billion years ago. A half billion years later, the last common ancestor of all
life arose. The evolution of photosynthesis allowed the Sun's energy to be
harvested directly by life forms. The resultant molecular oxygen (O2)
accumulated in the atmosphere and due to interaction with ultraviolet solar
radiation, formed a protective ozone layer (O3) in the upper atmosphere. The
incorporation of smaller cells within larger ones resulted in the development of
complex cells called eukaryotes. True multicellular organisms formed as cells
within colonies became increasingly specialized. Aided by the absorption of
harmful ultraviolet radiation by the ozone layer, life colonized Earth's
surface. Among the earliest fossil evidence for life is microbial mat fossils
found in 3.48 billion-year-old sandstone in Western Australia, biogenic graphite
found in 3.7 billion-year-old metasedimentary rocks in Western Greenland,
remains of biotic material found in 4.1 billion-year-old rocks in Western
Australia.

During the Neoproterozoic, 7002750000000000000♠750 to 580 Mya, much of Earth
might have been covered in ice. This hypothesis has been termed "Snowball
Earth", and it is of particular interest because it preceded the Cambrian
explosion, when multicellular life forms significantly increased in complexity.
Following the Cambrian explosion, 7002535000000000000♠535 Mya, there have been
five major mass extinctions. The most recent such event was
7001660000000000000♠66 Mya, when an asteroid impact triggered the extinction of
the non-avian dinosaurs and other large reptiles, but spared some small animals
such as mammals, which then resembled shrews. Over the past
7015208280160000000♠66 Ma, mammalian life has diversified, and several million
years ago an African ape-like animal such as Orrorin tugenensis gained the
ability to stand upright. This facilitated tool use and encouraged communication
that provided the nutrition and stimulation needed for a larger brain, which
allowed the evolution of humans. The development of agriculture, and then
civilization, led to humans having an influence on Earth and the nature and
quantity of other life forms that continues today.

Earth's expected long-term future is closely tied to that of the Sun. Over the
next 7016347133600000000♠1.1 Ga, solar luminosity will increase by 10%, and over
the next 7017110451600000000♠3.5 Ga by 40%. The Earth's increasing surface
temperature will accelerate the inorganic CO2 cycle, reducing its concentration
to levels lethally low for plants (6995099999999999999♠10 ppm for C4
photosynthesis) in approximately 500–7016284018400000000♠900 Ma. The lack of
vegetation will result in the loss of oxygen in the atmosphere, and animal life
will become extinct. After another billion years all surface water will have
disappeared and the mean global temperature will reach 7002343150000000000♠70 °C
(7002343150000000000♠158 °F). From that point, the Earth is expected to be
habitable for another 7016157788000000000♠500 Ma, possibly up to
7016725824800000000♠2.3 Ga if nitrogen is removed from the atmosphere. Even if
the Sun were eternal and stable, 27% of the water in the modern oceans will
descend to the mantle in one billion years, due to reduced steam venting from
mid-ocean ridges.

The Sun will evolve to become a red giant in about 7017157788000000000♠5 Ga.
Models predict that the Sun will expand to roughly 1 AU (150,000,000 km), which
is about 250 times its present radius. Earth's fate is less clear. As a red
giant, the Sun will lose roughly 30% of its mass, so, without tidal effects,
Earth will move to an orbit 1.7 AU from the Sun when the star reaches its
maximum radius. Most, if not all, remaining life will be destroyed by the Sun's
increased luminosity (peaking at about 5,000 times its present level). A 2008
simulation indicates that Earth's orbit will eventually decay due to tidal
effects and drag, causing it to enter the Sun's atmosphere and be vaporized.

The shape of Earth is approximately oblate spheroidal. Due to rotation, the
Earth is flattened along the geographic axis and bulging around the equator. The
diameter of the Earth at the equator is 43 kilometres (27 mi) larger than the
pole-to-pole diameter. Thus the point on the surface farthest from Earth's
center of mass is the summit of the equatorial Chimborazo volcano in Ecuador.
The average diameter of the reference spheroid is 12,742 kilometres (7,918 mi).
Local topography deviates from this idealized spheroid, although on a global
scale these deviations are small compared to Earth's radius: The maximum
deviation of only 0.17% is at the Mariana Trench (10,911 metres (35,797 ft)
below local sea level), whereas Mount Everest (8,848 metres (29,029 ft) above
local sea level) represents a deviation of 0.14%.[n 15]

Earth's mass is approximately 7024597000000000000♠5.97×1024 kg (5,970 Yg). It is
composed mostly of iron (32.1%), oxygen (30.1%), silicon (15.1%), magnesium
(13.9%), sulfur (2.9%), nickel (1.8%), calcium (1.5%), and aluminium (1.4%),
with the remaining 1.2% consisting of trace amounts of other elements. Due to
mass segregation, the core region is estimated to be primarily composed of iron
(88.8%), with smaller amounts of nickel (5.8%), sulfur (4.5%), and less than 1%
trace elements.

The most common rock constituents of the crust are nearly all oxides: chlorine,
sulfur, and fluorine are the important exceptions to this and their total amount
in any rock is usually much less than 1%. Over 99% of the crust is composed of
11 oxides, principally silica, alumina, iron oxides, lime, magnesia, potash, and
soda.

Earth's interior, like that of the other terrestrial planets, is divided into
layers by their chemical or physical (rheological) properties. The outer layer
is a chemically distinct silicate solid crust, which is underlain by a highly
viscous solid mantle. The crust is separated from the mantle by the Mohorovičić
discontinuity. The thickness of the crust varies from about
7003600000000000000♠6 km (kilometers) under the oceans to 30–50 km for the
continents. The crust and the cold, rigid, top of the upper mantle are
collectively known as the lithosphere, and it is of the lithosphere that the
tectonic plates are composed. Beneath the lithosphere is the asthenosphere, a
relatively low-viscosity layer on which the lithosphere rides. Important changes
in crystal structure within the mantle occur at 410 and
7005660000000000000♠660 km below the surface, spanning a transition zone that
separates the upper and lower mantle. Beneath the mantle, an extremely low
viscosity liquid outer core lies above a solid inner core. The Earth's inner
core might rotate at a slightly higher angular velocity than the remainder of
the planet, advancing by 0.1–0.5° per year. The radius of the inner core is
about one fifth of that of Earth.

Earth's internal heat comes from a combination of residual heat from planetary
accretion (about 20%) and heat produced through radioactive decay (80%). The
major heat-producing isotopes within Earth are potassium-40, uranium-238, and
thorium-232. At the center, the temperature may be up to 6,000 °C (10,830 °F),
and the pressure could reach 360 GPa. Because much of the heat is provided by
radioactive decay, scientists postulate that early in Earth's history, before
isotopes with short half-lives were depleted, Earth's heat production was much
higher. At approximately 7016946728000000000♠3 Ga, twice the present-day heat
would have been produced, increasing the rates of mantle convection and plate
tectonics, and allowing the production of uncommon igneous rocks such as
komatiites that are rarely formed today.

The mean heat loss from Earth is 87 mW m−2, for a global heat loss of 4.42 ×
1013 W. A portion of the core's thermal energy is transported toward the crust
by mantle plumes, a form of convection consisting of upwellings of
higher-temperature rock. These plumes can produce hotspots and flood basalts.
More of the heat in Earth is lost through plate tectonics, by mantle upwelling
associated with mid-ocean ridges. The final major mode of heat loss is through
conduction through the lithosphere, the majority of which occurs under the
oceans because the crust there is much thinner than that of the continents.

The mechanically rigid outer layer of Earth, the lithosphere, is divided into
pieces called tectonic plates. These plates are rigid segments that move in
relation to one another at one of three types of plate boundaries: convergent
boundaries, at which two plates come together, divergent boundaries, at which
two plates are pulled apart, and transform boundaries, in which two plates slide
past one another laterally. Earthquakes, volcanic activity, mountain-building,
and oceanic trench formation can occur along these plate boundaries. The
tectonic plates ride on top of the asthenosphere, the solid but less-viscous
part of the upper mantle that can flow and move along with the plates.

As the tectonic plates migrate, oceanic crust is subducted under the leading
edges of the plates at convergent boundaries. At the same time, the upwelling of
mantle material at divergent boundaries creates mid-ocean ridges. The
combination of these processes recycles the oceanic crust back into the mantle.
Due to this recycling, most of the ocean floor is less than
7015315576000000000♠100 Ma old in age. The oldest oceanic crust is located in
the Western Pacific and has an estimated age of 7015631152000000000♠200 Ma. By
comparison, the oldest dated continental crust is 7017127177128000000♠4030 Ma.

The seven major plates are the Pacific, North American, Eurasian, African,
Antarctic, Indo-Australian, and South American. Other notable plates include the
Arabian Plate, the Caribbean Plate, the Nazca Plate off the west coast of South
America and the Scotia Plate in the southern Atlantic Ocean. The Australian
Plate fused with the Indian Plate between 50 and 7001550000000000000♠55 Mya. The
fastest-moving plates are the oceanic plates, with the Cocos Plate advancing at
a rate of 75 mm/year and the Pacific Plate moving 52–69 mm/year. At the other
extreme, the slowest-moving plate is the Eurasian Plate, progressing at a
typical rate of 21 mm/year.

The total surface area of the Earth is about 7008510000000000000♠510 million km2
(197 million sq mi). Of this, 70.8%, or 7008361130000000000♠361.13 million km2
(139.43 million sq mi), is below sea level and covered by ocean water. Below the
ocean's surface are much of the continental shelf, mountains, volcanoes, oceanic
trenches, submarine canyons, oceanic plateaus, abyssal plains, and a
globe-spanning mid-ocean ridge system. The remaining 29.2%
(7008148940000000000♠148.94 million km2, or 57.51 million sq mi) not covered by
water has terrain that varies greatly from place to place and consists of
mountains, deserts, plains, plateaus, and other landforms. Tectonics and
erosion, volcanic eruptions, flooding, weathering, glaciation, the growth of
coral reefs, and meteorite impacts are among the processes that constantly
reshape the Earth's surface over geological time.

The continental crust consists of lower density material such as the igneous
rocks granite and andesite. Less common is basalt, a denser volcanic rock that
is the primary constituent of the ocean floors. Sedimentary rock is formed from
the accumulation of sediment that becomes buried and compacted together. Nearly
75% of the continental surfaces are covered by sedimentary rocks, although they
form about 5% of the crust. The third form of rock material found on Earth is
metamorphic rock, which is created from the transformation of pre-existing rock
types through high pressures, high temperatures, or both. The most abundant
silicate minerals on Earth's surface include quartz, feldspars, amphibole, mica,
pyroxene and olivine. Common carbonate minerals include calcite (found in
limestone) and dolomite.

The elevation of the land surface varies from the low point of −418 m at the
Dead Sea, to a maximum altitude of 8,848 m at the top of Mount Everest. The mean
height of land above sea level is 840 m.

The pedosphere is the outermost layer of Earth's continental surface and is
composed of soil and subject to soil formation processes. The total arable land
is 10.9% of the land surface, with 1.3% being permanent cropland. Close to 40%
of Earth's land surface is used for cropland and pasture, or an estimated
1.3×107 km2 of cropland and 3.4×107 km2 of pastureland.

The abundance of water on Earth's surface is a unique feature that distinguishes
the "Blue Planet" from other planets in the Solar System. Earth's hydrosphere
consists chiefly of the oceans, but technically includes all water surfaces in
the world, including inland seas, lakes, rivers, and underground waters down to
a depth of 2,000 m. The deepest underwater location is Challenger Deep of the
Mariana Trench in the Pacific Ocean with a depth of 10,911.4 m.[n 19]

The mass of the oceans is approximately 1.35×1018 metric tons or about 1/4400 of
Earth's total mass. The oceans cover an area of
7014361800000000000♠3.618×108 km2 with a mean depth of
7003368200000000000♠3682 m, resulting in an estimated volume of
7018133200000000000♠1.332×109 km3. If all of Earth's crustal surface were at the
same elevation as a smooth sphere, the depth of the resulting world ocean would
be 2.7 to 2.8 km.

About 97.5% of the water is saline; the remaining 2.5% is fresh water. Most
fresh water, about 68.7%, is present as ice in ice caps and glaciers.

The average salinity of Earth's oceans is about 35 grams of salt per kilogram of
sea water (3.5% salt). Most of this salt was released from volcanic activity or
extracted from cool igneous rocks. The oceans are also a reservoir of dissolved
atmospheric gases, which are essential for the survival of many aquatic life
forms. Sea water has an important influence on the world's climate, with the
oceans acting as a large heat reservoir. Shifts in the oceanic temperature
distribution can cause significant weather shifts, such as the El Niño-Southern
Oscillation.

The atmospheric pressure on Earth's surface averages 101.325 kPa, with a scale
height of about 8.5 km. It has a composition of 78% nitrogen and 21% oxygen,
with trace amounts of water vapor, carbon dioxide, and other gaseous molecules.
The height of the troposphere varies with latitude, ranging between 8 km at the
poles to 17 km at the equator, with some variation resulting from weather and
seasonal factors.

Earth's biosphere has significantly altered its atmosphere. Oxygenic
photosynthesis evolved 7000270000000000000♠2.7 Gya, forming the primarily
nitrogen–oxygen atmosphere of today. This change enabled the proliferation of
aerobic organisms and, indirectly, the formation of the ozone layer due to the
subsequent conversion of atmospheric O2 into O3. The ozone layer blocks
ultraviolet solar radiation, permitting life on land. Other atmospheric
functions important to life include transporting water vapor, providing useful
gases, causing small meteors to burn up before they strike the surface, and
moderating temperature. This last phenomenon is known as the greenhouse effect:
trace molecules within the atmosphere serve to capture thermal energy emitted
from the ground, thereby raising the average temperature. Water vapor, carbon
dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, and ozone are the primary greenhouse gases in
the atmosphere. Without this heat-retention effect, the average surface
temperature would be −18 °C, in contrast to the current +15 °C, and life on
Earth probably wouldn't exist in its current form.

Earth's atmosphere has no definite boundary, slowly becoming thinner and fading
into outer space. Three-quarters of the atmosphere's mass is contained within
the first 11 km (6.8 mi) of the surface. This lowest layer is called the
troposphere. Energy from the Sun heats this layer, and the surface below,
causing expansion of the air. This lower-density air then rises and is replaced
by cooler, higher-density air. The result is atmospheric circulation that drives
the weather and climate through redistribution of thermal energy.

The primary atmospheric circulation bands consist of the trade winds in the
equatorial region below 30° latitude and the westerlies in the mid-latitudes
between 30° and 60°. Ocean currents are also important factors in determining
climate, particularly the thermohaline circulation that distributes thermal
energy from the equatorial oceans to the polar regions.

Water vapor generated through surface evaporation is transported by circulatory
patterns in the atmosphere. When atmospheric conditions permit an uplift of
warm, humid air, this water condenses and falls to the surface as precipitation.
Most of the water is then transported to lower elevations by river systems and
usually returned to the oceans or deposited into lakes. This water cycle is a
vital mechanism for supporting life on land and is a primary factor in the
erosion of surface features over geological periods. Precipitation patterns vary
widely, ranging from several meters of water per year to less than a millimeter.
Atmospheric circulation, topographic features, and temperature differences
determine the average precipitation that falls in each region.

The amount of solar energy reaching Earth's surface decreases with increasing
latitude. At higher latitudes, the sunlight reaches the surface at lower angles,
and it must pass through thicker columns of the atmosphere. As a result, the
mean annual air temperature at sea level decreases by about 0.4 °C (0.7 °F) per
degree of latitude from the equator. Earth's surface can be subdivided into
specific latitudinal belts of approximately homogeneous climate. Ranging from
the equator to the polar regions, these are the tropical (or equatorial),
subtropical, temperate and polar climates.

The commonly used Köppen climate classification system has five broad groups
(humid tropics, arid, humid middle latitudes, continental and cold polar), which
are further divided into more specific subtypes. The Köppen system rates regions
of terrain based on observed temperature and precipitation.

The highest air temperature ever measured on Earth was 56.7 °C (134.1 °F) in
Furnace Creek, California, in Death Valley, in 1913. The lowest air temperature
ever directly measured on Earth was −89.2 °C (−128.6 °F) at Vostok Station in
1983, but satellites have used remote sensing to measure temperatures as low as
−94.7 °C (−138.5 °F) in East Antarctica. These temperature records are only
measurements made with modern instruments from the 20th century onwards and
likely do not reflect the full range of temperature on Earth.

Above the troposphere, the atmosphere is usually divided into the stratosphere,
mesosphere, and thermosphere. Each layer has a different lapse rate, defining
the rate of change in temperature with height. Beyond these, the exosphere thins
out into the magnetosphere, where the geomagnetic fields interact with the solar
wind. Within the stratosphere is the ozone layer, a component that partially
shields the surface from ultraviolet light and thus is important for life on
Earth. The Kármán line, defined as 100 km above Earth's surface, is a working
definition for the boundary between the atmosphere and outer space.

Thermal energy causes some of the molecules at the outer edge of the atmosphere
to increase their velocity to the point where they can escape from Earth's
gravity. This causes a slow but steady loss of the atmosphere into space.
Because unfixed hydrogen has a low molecular mass, it can achieve escape
velocity more readily, and it leaks into outer space at a greater rate than
other gases. The leakage of hydrogen into space contributes to the shifting of
Earth's atmosphere and surface from an initially reducing state to its current
oxidizing one. Photosynthesis provided a source of free oxygen, but the loss of
reducing agents such as hydrogen is thought to have been a necessary
precondition for the widespread accumulation of oxygen in the atmosphere. Hence
the ability of hydrogen to escape from the atmosphere may have influenced the
nature of life that developed on Earth. In the current, oxygen-rich atmosphere
most hydrogen is converted into water before it has an opportunity to escape.
Instead, most of the hydrogen loss comes from the destruction of methane in the
upper atmosphere.

The gravity of Earth is the acceleration that is imparted to objects due to the
distribution of mass within the Earth. Near the Earth's surface, gravitational
acceleration is approximately 9.8 m/s2 (32 ft/s2). Local differences in
topography, geology, and deeper tectonic structure cause local and broad,
regional differences in the Earth's gravitational field, known as gravitational
anomalies.

The main part of Earth's magnetic field is generated in the core, the site of a
dynamo process that converts the kinetic energy of thermally and compositionally
driven convection into electrical and magnetic field energy. The field extends
outwards from the core, through the mantle, and up to Earth's surface, where it
is, approximately, a dipole. The poles of the dipole are located close to
Earth's geographic poles. At the equator of the magnetic field, the
magnetic-field strength at the surface is 3.05 × 10−5 T, with global magnetic
dipole moment of 7.91 × 1015 T m3. The convection movements in the core are
chaotic; the magnetic poles drift and periodically change alignment. This causes
secular variation of the main field and field reversals at irregular intervals
averaging a few times every million years. The most recent reversal occurred
approximately 700,000 years ago.

The extent of Earth's magnetic field in space defines the magnetosphere. Ions
and electrons of the solar wind are deflected by the magnetosphere; solar wind
pressure compresses the dayside of the magnetosphere, to about 10 Earth radii,
and extends the nightside magnetosphere into a long tail. Because the velocity
of the solar wind is greater than the speed at which wave propagate through the
solar wind, a supersonic bowshock precedes the dayside magnetosphere within the
solar wind. Charged particles are contained within the magnetosphere; the
plasmasphere is defined by low-energy particles that essentially follow magnetic
field lines as Earth rotates; the ring current is defined by medium-energy
particles that drift relative to the geomagnetic field, but with paths that are
still dominated by the magnetic field, and the Van Allen radiation belt are
formed by high-energy particles whose motion is essentially random, but
otherwise contained by the magnetosphere.

During magnetic storms and substorms, charged particles can be deflected from
the outer magnetosphere and especially the magnetotail, directed along field
lines into Earth's ionosphere, where atmospheric atoms can be excited and
ionized, causing the aurora.

Earth's rotation period relative to the Sun—its mean solar day—is 86,400 seconds
of mean solar time (86,400.0025 SI seconds). Because Earth's solar day is now
slightly longer than it was during the 19th century due to tidal deceleration,
each day varies between 0 and 2 SI ms longer.

Earth's rotation period relative to the fixed stars, called its stellar day by
the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service (IERS), is
86,164.098903691 seconds of mean solar time (UT1), or 23h 56m 4.098903691s.[n
20] Earth's rotation period relative to the precessing or moving mean vernal
equinox, misnamed its sidereal day, is 86,164.09053083288 seconds of mean solar
time (UT1) (23h 56m 4.09053083288s) as of 1982[update]. Thus the sidereal day is
shorter than the stellar day by about 8.4 ms. The length of the mean solar day
in SI seconds is available from the IERS for the periods 1623–2005 and
1962–2005.

Apart from meteors within the atmosphere and low-orbiting satellites, the main
apparent motion of celestial bodies in Earth's sky is to the west at a rate of
15°/h = 15'/min. For bodies near the celestial equator, this is equivalent to an
apparent diameter of the Sun or the Moon every two minutes; from Earth's
surface, the apparent sizes of the Sun and the Moon are approximately the same.

Earth orbits the Sun at an average distance of about 150 million km
(93 million mi) every 365.2564 mean solar days, or one sidereal year. This gives
an apparent movement of the Sun eastward with respect to the stars at a rate of
about 1°/day, which is one apparent Sun or Moon diameter every 12 hours. Due to
this motion, on average it takes 24 hours—a solar day—for Earth to complete a
full rotation about its axis so that the Sun returns to the meridian. The
orbital speed of Earth averages about 29.78 km/s (107,200 km/h; 66,600 mph),
which is fast enough to travel a distance equal to Earth's diameter, about
12,742 km (7,918 mi), in seven minutes, and the distance to the Moon, 384,000 km
(239,000 mi), in about 3.5 hours.

The Moon and Earth orbit a common barycenter every 27.32 days relative to the
background stars. When combined with the Earth–Moon system's common orbit around
the Sun, the period of the synodic month, from new moon to new moon, is
29.53 days. Viewed from the celestial north pole, the motion of Earth, the Moon,
and their axial rotations are all counterclockwise. Viewed from a vantage point
above the north poles of both the Sun and Earth, Earth orbits in a
counterclockwise direction about the Sun. The orbital and axial planes are not
precisely aligned: Earth's axis is tilted some 23.44 degrees from the
perpendicular to the Earth–Sun plane (the ecliptic), and the Earth–Moon plane is
tilted up to ±5.1 degrees against the Earth–Sun plane. Without this tilt, there
would be an eclipse every two weeks, alternating between lunar eclipses and
solar eclipses.

The Hill sphere, or the sphere of gravitational influence, of the Earth is about
1.5 million kilometres (930,000 mi) in radius.[n 21] This is the maximum
distance at which the Earth's gravitational influence is stronger than the more
distant Sun and planets. Objects must orbit the Earth within this radius, or
they can become unbound by the gravitational perturbation of the Sun.

Earth, along with the Solar System, is situated in the Milky Way and orbits
about 28,000 light-years from its center. It is about 20 light-years above the
galactic plane in the Orion Arm.

The axial tilt of the Earth is approximately 23.439281° with the axis of its
orbit plane, always pointing towards the Celestial Poles. Due to Earth's axial
tilt, the amount of sunlight reaching any given point on the surface varies over
the course of the year. This causes the seasonal change in climate, with summer
in the Northern Hemisphere occurring when the Tropic of Cancer is facing the
Sun, and winter taking place when the Tropic of Capricorn in the Southern
Hemisphere faces the Sun. During the summer, the day lasts longer, and the Sun
climbs higher in the sky. In winter, the climate becomes cooler and the days
shorter. In northern temperate latitudes, the Sun rises north of true east
during the summer solstice, and sets north of true west, reversing in the
winter. The Sun rises south of true east in the summer for the southern
temperate zone and sets south of true west.

Above the Arctic Circle, an extreme case is reached where there is no daylight
at all for part of the year, up to six months at the North Pole itself, a polar
night. In the Southern Hemisphere, the situation is exactly reversed, with the
South Pole oriented opposite the direction of the North Pole. Six months later,
this pole will experience a midnight sun, a day of 24 hours, again reversing
with the South Pole.

By astronomical convention, the four seasons can be determined by the
solstices—the points in the orbit of maximum axial tilt toward or away from the
Sun—and the equinoxes, when the direction of the tilt and the direction to the
Sun are perpendicular. In the Northern Hemisphere, winter solstice currently
occurs around 21 December; summer solstice is near 21 June, spring equinox is
around 20 March and autumnal equinox is about 22 or 23 September. In the
Southern Hemisphere, the situation is reversed, with the summer and winter
solstices exchanged and the spring and autumnal equinox dates swapped.

The angle of Earth's axial tilt is relatively stable over long periods of time.
Its axial tilt does undergo nutation; a slight, irregular motion with a main
period of 18.6 years. The orientation (rather than the angle) of Earth's axis
also changes over time, precessing around in a complete circle over each
25,800 year cycle; this precession is the reason for the difference between a
sidereal year and a tropical year. Both of these motions are caused by the
varying attraction of the Sun and the Moon on Earth's equatorial bulge. The
poles also migrate a few meters across Earth's surface. This polar motion has
multiple, cyclical components, which collectively are termed quasiperiodic
motion. In addition to an annual component to this motion, there is a 14-month
cycle called the Chandler wobble. Earth's rotational velocity also varies in a
phenomenon known as length-of-day variation.

In modern times, Earth's perihelion occurs around 3 January, and its aphelion
around 4 July. These dates change over time due to precession and other orbital
factors, which follow cyclical patterns known as Milankovitch cycles. The
changing Earth–Sun distance causes an increase of about 6.9%[n 22] in solar
energy reaching Earth at perihelion relative to aphelion. Because the Southern
Hemisphere is tilted toward the Sun at about the same time that Earth reaches
the closest approach to the Sun, the Southern Hemisphere receives slightly more
energy from the Sun than does the northern over the course of a year. This
effect is much less significant than the total energy change due to the axial
tilt, and most of the excess energy is absorbed by the higher proportion of
water in the Southern Hemisphere.

A planet that can sustain life is termed habitable, even if life did not
originate there. Earth provides liquid water—an environment where complex
organic molecules can assemble and interact, and sufficient energy to sustain
metabolism. The distance of Earth from the Sun, as well as its orbital
eccentricity, rate of rotation, axial tilt, geological history, sustaining
atmosphere, and magnetic field all contribute to the current climatic conditions
at the surface.

A planet's life forms inhabit ecosystems, whose total is sometimes said to form
a "biosphere". Earth's biosphere is thought to have begun evolving about
7000350000000000000♠3.5 Gya. The biosphere is divided into a number of biomes,
inhabited by broadly similar plants and animals. On land, biomes are separated
primarily by differences in latitude, height above sea level and humidity.
Terrestrial biomes lying within the Arctic or Antarctic Circles, at high
altitudes or in extremely arid areas are relatively barren of plant and animal
life; species diversity reaches a peak in humid lowlands at equatorial
latitudes.

In July 2016, scientists reported identifying a set of 355 genes from the Last
Universal Common Ancestor (LUCA) of all organisms living on Earth.

Earth has resources that have been exploited by humans. Those termed
non-renewable resources, such as fossil fuels, only renew over geological
timescales.

Large deposits of fossil fuels are obtained from Earth's crust, consisting of
coal, petroleum, and natural gas. These deposits are used by humans both for
energy production and as feedstock for chemical production. Mineral ore bodies
have also been formed within the crust through a process of ore genesis,
resulting from actions of magmatism, erosion, and plate tectonics. These bodies
form concentrated sources for many metals and other useful elements.

Earth's biosphere produces many useful biological products for humans, including
food, wood, pharmaceuticals, oxygen, and the recycling of many organic wastes.
The land-based ecosystem depends upon topsoil and fresh water, and the oceanic
ecosystem depends upon dissolved nutrients washed down from the land. In 1980,
5,053 Mha (50.53 million km2) of Earth's land surface consisted of forest and
woodlands, 6,788 Mha (67.88 million km2) was grasslands and pasture, and
1,501 Mha (15.01 million km2) was cultivated as croplands. The estimated amount
of irrigated land in 1993 was 2,481,250 square kilometres (958,020 sq mi).
Humans also live on the land by using building materials to construct shelters.

Large areas of Earth's surface are subject to extreme weather such as tropical
cyclones, hurricanes, or typhoons that dominate life in those areas. From 1980
to 2000, these events caused an average of 11,800 human deaths per year. Many
places are subject to earthquakes, landslides, tsunamis, volcanic eruptions,
tornadoes, sinkholes, blizzards, floods, droughts, wildfires, and other
calamities and disasters.

Many localized areas are subject to human-made pollution of the air and water,
acid rain and toxic substances, loss of vegetation (overgrazing, deforestation,
desertification), loss of wildlife, species extinction, soil degradation, soil
depletion and erosion.

There is a scientific consensus linking human activities to global warming due
to industrial carbon dioxide emissions. This is predicted to produce changes
such as the melting of glaciers and ice sheets, more extreme temperature ranges,
significant changes in weather and a global rise in average sea levels.

Cartography, the study and practice of map-making, and geography, the study of
the lands, features, inhabitants and phenomena on Earth, have historically been
the disciplines devoted to depicting Earth. Surveying, the determination of
locations and distances, and to a lesser extent navigation, the determination of
position and direction, have developed alongside cartography and geography,
providing and suitably quantifying the requisite information.

Earth's human population reached approximately seven billion on 31 October 2011.
Projections indicate that the world's human population will reach 9.2 billion in
2050. Most of the growth is expected to take place in developing nations. Human
population density varies widely around the world, but a majority live in Asia.
By 2020, 60% of the world's population is expected to be living in urban, rather
than rural, areas.

It is estimated that one-eighth of Earth's surface is suitable for humans to
live on – three-quarters of Earth's surface is covered by oceans, leaving
one-quarter as land. Half of that land area is desert (14%), high mountains
(27%), or other unsuitable terrains. The northernmost permanent settlement in
the world is Alert, on Ellesmere Island in Nunavut, Canada. (82°28′N) The
southernmost is the Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station, in Antarctica, almost
exactly at the South Pole. (90°S)

Independent sovereign nations claim the planet's entire land surface, except for
some parts of Antarctica, a few land parcels along the Danube river's western
bank, and the unclaimed area of Bir Tawil between Egypt and Sudan. As of
2015[update], there are 193 sovereign states that are member states of the
United Nations, plus two observer states and 72 dependent territories and states
with limited recognition. Earth has never had a sovereign government with
authority over the entire globe, although some nation-states have striven for
world domination and failed.

The United Nations is a worldwide intergovernmental organization that was
created with the goal of intervening in the disputes between nations, thereby
avoiding armed conflict. The U.N. serves primarily as a forum for international
diplomacy and international law. When the consensus of the membership permits,
it provides a mechanism for armed intervention.

The first human to orbit Earth was Yuri Gagarin on 12 April 1961. In total,
about 487 people have visited outer space and reached orbit as of 30 July
2010[update], and, of these, twelve have walked on the Moon. Normally, the only
humans in space are those on the International Space Station. The station's
crew, made up of six people, is usually replaced every six months. The farthest
that humans have traveled from Earth is 400,171 km, achieved during the Apollo
13 mission in 1970.

The Moon is a relatively large, terrestrial, planet-like natural satellite, with
a diameter about one-quarter of Earth's. It is the largest moon in the Solar
System relative to the size of its planet, although Charon is larger relative to
the dwarf planet Pluto. The natural satellites of other planets are also
referred to as "moons", after Earth's.

The gravitational attraction between Earth and the Moon causes tides on Earth.
The same effect on the Moon has led to its tidal locking: its rotation period is
the same as the time it takes to orbit Earth. As a result, it always presents
the same face to the planet. As the Moon orbits Earth, different parts of its
face are illuminated by the Sun, leading to the lunar phases; the dark part of
the face is separated from the light part by the solar terminator.

Due to their tidal interaction, the Moon recedes from Earth at the rate of
approximately 38 mm/yr. Over millions of years, these tiny modifications—and the
lengthening of Earth's day by about 23 µs/yr—add up to significant changes.
During the Devonian period, for example, (approximately
7002410000000000000♠410 Mya) there were 400 days in a year, with each day
lasting 21.8 hours.

The Moon may have dramatically affected the development of life by moderating
the planet's climate. Paleontological evidence and computer simulations show
that Earth's axial tilt is stabilized by tidal interactions with the Moon. Some
theorists think that without this stabilization against the torques applied by
the Sun and planets to Earth's equatorial bulge, the rotational axis might be
chaotically unstable, exhibiting chaotic changes over millions of years, as
appears to be the case for Mars.

Viewed from Earth, the Moon is just far enough away to have almost the same
apparent-sized disk as the Sun. The angular size (or solid angle) of these two
bodies match because, although the Sun's diameter is about 400 times as large as
the Moon's, it is also 400 times more distant. This allows total and annular
solar eclipses to occur on Earth.

The most widely accepted theory of the Moon's origin, the giant-impact
hypothesis, states that it formed from the collision of a Mars-size protoplanet
called Theia with the early Earth. This hypothesis explains (among other things)
the Moon's relative lack of iron and volatile elements and the fact that its
composition is nearly identical to that of Earth's crust.

Earth has at least five co-orbital asteroids, including 3753 Cruithne and 2002
AA29. A trojan asteroid companion, 2010 TK7, is librating around the leading
Lagrange triangular point, L4, in the Earth's orbit around the Sun.

The tiny near-Earth asteroid 2006 RH120 makes close approaches to the Earth–Moon
system roughly every twenty years. During these approaches, it can orbit Earth
for brief periods of time.

As of June 2016[update], there were 1,419 operational, human-made satellites
orbiting Earth. There are also inoperative satellites, including Vanguard 1, the
oldest satellite currently in orbit, and over 16,000 pieces of tracked space
debris.[n 3] Earth's largest artificial satellite is the International Space
Station.

The standard astronomical symbol of Earth consists of a cross circumscribed by a
circle, , representing the four corners of the world.

Human cultures have developed many views of the planet. Earth is sometimes
personified as a deity. In many cultures it is a mother goddess that is also the
primary fertility deity, and by the mid-20th century, the Gaia Principle
compared Earth's environments and life as a single self-regulating organism
leading to broad stabilization of the conditions of habitability. Creation myths
in many religions involve the creation of Earth by a supernatural deity or
deities.

Scientific investigation has resulted in several culturally transformative
shifts in our view of the planet. In the West, belief in a flat Earth was
displaced by the idea of spherical Earth, credited to Pythagoras in the 6th
century BC. Earth was further believed to be the center of the universe until
the 16th century when scientists first theorized that it was a moving object,
comparable to the other planets in the Solar System. Due to the efforts of
influential Christian scholars and clerics such as James Ussher, who sought to
determine the age of Earth through analysis of genealogies in Scripture,
Westerners before the 19th century generally believed Earth to be a few thousand
years old at most. It was only during the 19th century that geologists realized
Earth's age was at least many millions of years. Lord Kelvin used thermodynamics
to estimate the age of Earth to be between 20 million and 400 million years in
1864, sparking a vigorous debate on the subject; it was only when radioactivity
and radioactive dating were discovered in the late 19th and early 20th centuries
that a reliable mechanism for determining Earth's age was established, proving
the planet to be billions of years old. The perception of Earth shifted again in
the 20th century when humans first viewed it from orbit, and especially with
photographs of Earth returned by the Apollo program.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_the_Somme

The Battle of the Somme (French: Bataille de la Somme, German: Schlacht an der
Somme), also known as the Somme Offensive, was a battle of the First World War
fought by the armies of the British and French empires against the German
Empire. It took place between 1 July and 18 November 1916 on both sides of the
upper reaches of the River Somme in France. The battle was intended to hasten a
victory for the Allies and was the largest battle of the First World War on the
Western Front. More than one million men were wounded or killed, making it one
of the bloodiest battles in human history.

The French and British had committed themselves to an offensive on the Somme
during Allied discussions at Chantilly, Oise, in December 1915. The Allies
agreed upon a strategy of combined offensives against the Central Powers in
1916, by the French, Russian, British and Italian armies, with the Somme
offensive as the Franco-British contribution. Initial plans called for the
French army to undertake the main part of the Somme offensive, supported on the
northern flank by the Fourth Army of the British Expeditionary Force (BEF). When
the Imperial German Army began the Battle of Verdun on the Meuse on 21 February
1916, French commanders diverted many of the divisions intended for the Somme
and the "supporting" attack by the British became the principal effort.

The first day on the Somme (1 July) saw a serious defeat for the German Second
Army, which was forced out of its first position by the French Sixth Army, from
Foucaucourt-en-Santerre south of the Somme to Maricourt on the north bank and by
the Fourth Army from Maricourt to the vicinity of the Albert–Bapaume road. The
first day on the Somme was, in terms of casualties, also the worst day in the
history of the British army, which suffered 57,470 casualties. These occurred
mainly on the front between the Albert–Bapaume road and Gommecourt, where the
attack was defeated and few British troops reached the German front line. The
British troops on the Somme comprised a mixture of the remains of the pre-war
regular army; the Territorial Force; and Kitchener's Army, a force of volunteer
recruits including many Pals' Battalions, recruited from the same places and
occupations.

The battle is notable for the importance of air power and the first use of the
tank. At the end of the battle, British and French forces had penetrated 10 km
(6 mi) into German-occupied territory, taking more ground than in any of their
offensives since the Battle of the Marne in 1914. The Anglo-French armies failed
to capture Péronne and halted 5 km (3 mi) from Bapaume, where the German armies
maintained their positions over the winter. British attacks in the Ancre valley
resumed in January 1917 and forced the Germans into local withdrawals to reserve
lines in February, before the scheduled retirement to the Siegfriedstellung
(Hindenburg Line) began in March. Debate continues over the necessity,
significance and effect of the battle. David Frum opined that a century later,
"'the Somme' remains the most harrowing place-name" in the history of the
British Commonwealth.

Allied war strategy for 1916 was decided at the Chantilly Conference from 6–8
December 1915. Simultaneous offensives on the Eastern Front by the Russian army,
on the Italian Front by the Italian army, and on the Western Front by the
Franco-British armies, were to be carried out to deny time for the Central
Powers to move troops between fronts during lulls. In December 1915, General Sir
Douglas Haig replaced Field Marshal Sir John French as Commander-in-Chief of the
BEF. Haig favoured a British offensive in Flanders close to BEF supply routes,
to drive the Germans from the Belgian coast and end the U-boat threat from
Belgian waters. Haig was not formally subordinate to Marshal Joseph Joffre but
the British played a lesser role on the Western Front and complied with French
strategy. In January 1916, Joffre had agreed to the BEF making its main effort
in Flanders, but in February 1916 it was decided to mount a combined offensive
where the French and British armies met, astride the Somme River in Picardy
before the British offensive in Flanders. A week later the Germans began an
offensive against the French at Verdun. The costly defence of Verdun forced the
French army to commit divisions intended for the Somme offensive, eventually
reducing the French contribution to 13 divisions in the Sixth Army, against 20
British divisions. By 31 May, the ambitious Franco-British plan for a decisive
victory, had been reduced to a limited offensive to relieve pressure on the
French at Verdun with a battle of attrition on the Somme.

The Chief of the German General Staff, Erich von Falkenhayn, intended to end the
war by splitting the Anglo-French Entente in 1916, before its material
superiority became unbeatable. Falkenhayn planned to defeat the large amount of
reserves which the Entente could move into the path of a breakthrough, by
threatening a sensitive point close to the existing front line and provoking the
French into counter-attacking German positions. Falkenhayn chose to attack
towards Verdun to take the Meuse heights and make Verdun untenable. The French
would have to conduct a counter-offensive on ground dominated by the German army
and ringed with masses of heavy artillery, leading to huge losses and bring the
French army close to collapse. The British would then have to begin a hasty
relief offensive and would also suffer huge losses. Falkenhayn expected the
relief offensive to fall south of Arras against the Sixth Army and be destroyed.
(Despite the certainty by mid-June, of an Anglo-French attack on the Somme
against the Second Army, Falkenhayn sent only four divisions, keeping eight in
the western strategic reserve. No divisions were moved from the Sixth Army,
despite it holding a shorter line with  17 1⁄2 divisions and three of the
reserve divisions in the Sixth Army area. The maintenance of the strength of the
Sixth Army, at the expense of the Second Army on the Somme, indicated that
Falkenhayn intended the counter-offensive against the British to be made north
of the Somme front, once the British offensive had been shattered.) If such
Franco-British defeats were not enough, Germany would attack the remnants of
both armies and end the western alliance for good. The unexpected length of the
Verdun offensive, and the need to replace many exhausted units at Verdun,
depleted the German strategic reserve placed behind the Sixth Army, which held
the Western Front from Hannescamps, 18 km (11 mi) south-west of Arras to St.
Eloi, south of Ypres and reduced the German counter-offensive strategy north of
the Somme, to one of passive and unyielding defence.

The Battle of Verdun (21 February–18 December 1916) began a week after Joffre
and Haig agreed to mount an offensive on the Somme. The German offensive at
Verdun was intended to threaten the capture of the city and induce the French to
fight an attrition battle, in which German advantages of terrain and firepower
would cause the French disproportionate casualties. The battle changed the
nature of the offensive on the Somme, as French divisions were diverted to
Verdun, and the main effort by the French diminished to a supporting attack for
the British. German overestimation of the cost of Verdun to the French
contributed to the concentration of German infantry and guns on the north bank
of the Somme. By May, Joffre and Haig had changed their expectations of an
offensive on the Somme, from a decisive battle to a hope that it would relieve
Verdun and keep German divisions in France, which would assist the Russian
armies conducting the Brusilov Offensive. The German offensive at Verdun was
suspended in July, and troops, guns, and ammunition were transferred to Picardy,
leading to a similar transfer of the French Tenth Army to the Somme front. Later
in the year, the Franco-British were able to attack on the Somme and at Verdun
sequentially and the French recovered much of the ground lost on the east bank
of the Meuse in October and December.

The Brusilov Offensive (4 June – 20 September), absorbed the extra forces that
had been requested on 2 June by Fritz von Below, commanding the German Second
Army, for a spoiling attack on the Somme. On 4 June, Russian armies attacked on
a 200 mi (320 km) front, from the Romanian frontier to Pinsk and eventually
advanced 93 mi (150 km), reaching the foothills of the Carpathian mountains,
against German and Austro-Hungarian troops of Armeegruppe von Linsingen and
Armeegruppe Archduke Joseph. During the offensive the Russians inflicted
c. 1,500,000 losses including c. 407,000 prisoners. Three divisions were ordered
from France to the Eastern Front on 9 June and the spoiling attack on the Somme
was abandoned. Only four more divisions were sent to the Somme front before the
Anglo-French offensive began, bringing the total to  10 1⁄2 divisions.
Falkenhayn, and then Hindenburg and Ludendorff, were forced to send divisions to
Russia throughout the summer to prevent a collapse of the Austro-Hungarian army
and then to conduct a counter-offensive against Romania, which declared war
against the Central Powers on 27 August. In July there were 112 German divisions
on the Western Front and 52 divisions in Russia and in November there were 121
divisions in the west and 76 divisions in the east.

The original British Expeditionary Force (BEF) of six divisions and the Cavalry
Division, had lost most of the army's pre-war regular soldiers in the battles of
1914 and 1915. The bulk of the army was made up of volunteers of the Territorial
Force and Lord Kitchener's New Army, which had begun forming in August 1914.
Rapid expansion created many vacancies for senior commands and specialist
functions, which led to many appointments of retired officers and inexperienced
newcomers. In 1914, Douglas Haig had been a lieutenant-general in command of I
Corps and was promoted to command the First Army in early 1915 and then the BEF
in December, which eventually comprised five armies with sixty divisions. The
swift increase in the size of the army reduced the average level of experience
within it and created an acute equipment shortage. Many officers resorted to
directive command, to avoid delegating to novice subordinates, although
divisional commanders were given great latitude in training and planning for the
attack of 1 July, since the heterogeneous nature of the 1916 army made it
impossible for corps and army commanders to know the capacity of each division.

Despite considerable debate among German staff officers, Erich von Falkenhayn
continued the policy of unyielding defence in 1916. Falkenhayn implied after the
war that the psychology of German soldiers, shortage of manpower, and lack of
reserves made the policy inescapable, as the troops necessary to seal off
breakthroughs did not exist. High losses incurred in holding ground by a policy
of no retreat were preferable to higher losses, voluntary withdrawals, and the
effect of a belief that soldiers had discretion to avoid battle. When a more
flexible policy was substituted later, decisions about withdrawal were still
reserved to army commanders.) On the Somme front, Falkenhayn's construction plan
of January 1915 had been completed. Barbed wire obstacles had been enlarged from
one belt 5–10 yards (4.6–9.1 m) wide to two, 30 yards (27 m) wide and about 15
yards (14 m) apart. Double and triple thickness wire was used and laid 3–5 feet
(0.91–1.52 m) high. The front line had been increased from one trench line to
three, 150–200 yards (140–180 m) apart, the first trench occupied by sentry
groups, the second (Wohngraben) for the bulk of the front-trench garrison and
the third trench for local reserves. The trenches were traversed and had
sentry-posts in concrete recesses built into the parapet. Dugouts had been
deepened from 6–9 feet (1.8–2.7 m) to 20–30 feet (6.1–9.1 m), 50 yards (46 m)
apart and large enough for 25 men. An intermediate line of strongpoints (the
Stützpunktlinie) about 1,000 yards (910 m) behind the front line was also built.
Communication trenches ran back to the reserve line, renamed the second line,
which was as well-built and wired as the first line. The second line was beyond
the range of Allied field artillery, so as to force an attacker to stop and move
field artillery forward before assaulting the line.

British intentions evolved as the military situation changed after the Chantilly
Conference. French losses at Verdun reduced the contribution available for the
offensive on the Somme and increased the urgency for the commencement of
operations on the Somme. The principal role in the offensive devolved to the
British and on 16 June, Haig defined the objectives of the offensive as the
relief of pressure on the French at Verdun and the infliction of losses on the
Germans. After a five-day artillery bombardment, the British Fourth Army was to
capture 27,000 yards (25,000 m) of the German first line, from Montauban to
Serre and the Third Army was to mount a diversion at Gommecourt. In a second
phase, the Fourth Army was to take the German second position, from Pozières to
the Ancre and then the second position south of the Albert–Bapaume road, ready
for an attack on the German third position south of the road towards Flers, when
the Reserve Army which included three cavalry divisions, would exploit the
success to advance east and then north towards Arras. The French Sixth Army,
with one corps on the north bank from Maricourt to the Somme and two corps on
the south bank southwards to Foucaucourt, would make a subsidiary attack to
guard the right flank of the main attack being made by the British.

After the (Herbstschlacht or Autumn Battles) of 1915, a third defence line
another 3,000 yards (2,700 m) back from the Stützpunktlinie was begun in
February 1916 and was almost complete on the Somme front when the battle began.
German artillery was organised in a series of Sperrfeuerstreifen (barrage
sectors); each officer was expected to know the batteries covering his section
of the front line and the batteries ready to engage fleeting targets. A
telephone system was built, with lines buried 6 feet (1.8 m) deep for 5 mi
(8.0 km) behind the front line, to connect the front line to the artillery. The
Somme defences had two inherent weaknesses that the rebuilding had not remedied.
The front trenches were on a forward slope, lined by white chalk from the
subsoil and easily seen by ground observers. The defences were crowded towards
the front trench, with a regiment having two battalions near the front-trench
system and the reserve battalion divided between the Stützpunktlinie and the
second line, all within 2,000 yards (1,800 m) and most troops within 1,000 yards
(910 m) of the front line, accommodated in the new deep dugouts. The
concentration of troops at the front line on a forward slope guaranteed that it
would face the bulk of an artillery bombardment, directed by ground observers on
clearly marked lines.

The first day on the Somme began 141 days of the Battle of the Somme and the
opening day of the Battle of Albert. The attack was made by five divisions of
the French Sixth Army either side of the Somme, eleven British divisions of the
Fourth Army north of the Somme to Serre and two divisions of the Third Army
opposite Gommecourt, against the German Second Army of General Fritz von Below.
The German defence south of the Albert–Bapaume road mostly collapsed and the
French had "complete success" on both banks of the Somme, as did the British
from the army boundary at Maricourt to the Albert–Bapaume road. On the south
bank the German defence was made incapable of resisting another attack and a
substantial retreat began; on the north bank the abandonment of Fricourt was
ordered. The defenders on the commanding ground north of the road inflicted a
huge defeat on the British infantry, who had an unprecedented number of
casualties. Several truces were negotiated, to recover wounded from no man's
land north of the road. The Fourth Army took 57,470 casualties, of which 19,240
men were killed, the French Sixth Army had 1,590 casualties and the German 2nd
Army had 10,000–12,000 losses.

The Battle of Albert was the first two weeks of Anglo-French offensive
operations in the Battle of the Somme. The Allied preparatory artillery
bombardment began on 24 June and the Anglo-French infantry attacked on 1 July,
on the south bank from Foucaucourt to the Somme and from the Somme north to
Gommecourt, 2 mi (3.2 km) beyond Serre. The French Sixth Army and the right wing
of the British Fourth Army inflicted a considerable defeat on the German Second
Army but from the Albert–Bapaume road to Gommecourt, the British attack was a
disaster where most of the c. 60,000 British casualties were incurred. Against
Joffre's wishes, Haig abandoned the offensive north of the road, to reinforce
the success in the south, where the Anglo-French forces pressed forward towards
the German second line, preparatory to a general attack on 14 July.

The Fourth Army attacked the German second defensive position from the Somme
past Guillemont and Ginchy, north-west along the crest of the ridge to Pozières
on the Albert–Bapaume road. The objectives of the attack were the villages of
Bazentin le Petit, Bazentin le Grand and Longueval which was adjacent to
Delville Wood, with High Wood on the ridge beyond. The attack was made by four
divisions on a front of 6,000 yd (5.5 km) at 3:25 a.m. after a five-minute
hurricane artillery bombardment. Field artillery fired a creeping barrage and
the attacking waves pushed up close behind it in no man's land, leaving them
only a short distance to cross when the barrage lifted from the German front
trench. Most of the objective was captured and the German defence south of the
Albert–Bapaume road put under great strain but the attack was not followed up
due to British communication failures, casualties and disorganisation.

The Battle of Fromelles was a subsidiary attack to support the Fourth Army on
the Somme 80 km (50 mi) to the south, to exploit any weakening of the German
defences opposite. Preparations for the attack were rushed, the troops involved
lacked experience in trench warfare and the power of the German defence was
"gravely" underestimated, the attackers being outnumbered 2:1. On 19 July, von
Falkenhayn had judged the British attack to be the anticipated offensive against
the 6th Army. Next day Falkenhayn ordered the Guard Reserve Corps to be
withdrawn to reinforce the Somme front. The Battle of Fromelles had inflicted
some losses on the German defenders but gained no ground and deflected few
German troops bound for the Somme. The attack was the debut of the Australian
Imperial Force on the Western Front and, according to McMullin, "the worst 24
hours in Australia's entire history". Of 7,080 BEF casualties, 5,533 losses were
incurred by the 5th Australian Division; German losses were 1,600–2,000, with
150 taken prisoner.

The Battle of Delville Wood was an operation to secure the British right flank,
while the centre advanced to capture the higher lying areas of High Wood and
Pozières. After the Battle of Albert the offensive had evolved to the capture of
fortified villages, woods, and other terrain that offered observation for
artillery fire, jumping-off points for more attacks, and other tactical
advantages. The mutually costly fighting at Delville Wood eventually secured the
British right flank and marked the Western Front debut of the South African 1st
Infantry Brigade (incorporating a Southern Rhodesian contingent), which held the
wood from 15–20 July. When relieved the brigade had lost 2,536 men, similar to
the casualties of many brigades on 1 July.

The Battle of Pozières began with the capture of the village by the 1st
Australian Division (Australian Imperial Force) of the Reserve Army, the only
British success in the Allied fiasco of 22/23 July, when a general attack
combined with the French further south, degenerated into a series of separate
attacks due to communication failures, supply failures and poor weather. German
bombardments and counter-attacks began on 23 July and continued until 7 August.
The fighting ended with the Reserve Army taking the plateau north and east of
the village, overlooking the fortified village of Thiepval from the rear.

The Battle of Guillemont was an attack on the village which was captured by the
Fourth Army on the first day. Guillemont was on the right flank of the British
sector, near the boundary with the French Sixth Army. German defences ringed the
British salient at Delville Wood to the north and had observation over the
French Sixth Army area to the south towards the Somme river. The German defence
in the area was based on the second line and numerous fortified villages and
farms north from Maurepas at Combles, Guillemont, Falfemont Farm, Delville Wood
and High Wood, which were mutually supporting. The battle for Guillemont was
considered by some observers to be the supreme effort of the German army during
the battle. Numerous meetings were held by Joffre, Haig, Foch, Rawlinson and
Fayolle to co-ordinate joint attacks by the four armies, all of which broke
down. A pause in Anglo-French attacks at the end of August, coincided with the
largest counter-attack by the German army in the Battle of the Somme.

In the Battle of Ginchy the 16th Division captured the German-held village.
Ginchy was 1.5 km (0.93 mi) north-east of Guillemont, at the junction of six
roads on a rise overlooking Combles, 4 km (2.5 mi) to the south-east. After the
end of the Battle of Guillemont, British troops were required to advance to
positions which would give observation over the German third position, ready for
a general attack in mid-September. British attacks from Leuze Wood northwards to
Ginchy had begun on 3 September, when the 7th Division captured the village and
was then forced out by a German counter-attack. The capture of Ginchy and the
success of the French Sixth Army on 12 September, in its biggest attack of the
battle of the Somme, enabled both armies to make much bigger attacks, sequenced
with the Tenth and Reserve armies, which captured much more ground and inflicted
c. 130,000 casualties on the German defenders during the month.

The Battle of Flers–Courcelette was the third and final general offensive
mounted by the British Army, which attacked an intermediate line and the German
third line to take Morval, Lesboeufs and Gueudecourt, which was combined with a
French attack on Frégicourt and Rancourt to encircle Combles and a supporting
attack on the south bank of the Somme. The strategic objective of a breakthrough
was not achieved but the tactical gains were considerable, the front line being
advanced by 2,500–3,500 yards (2,300–3,200 m) and many casualties were inflicted
on the German defenders. The battle was the debut of the Canadian Corps, New
Zealand Division and tanks of the Heavy Branch of the Machine Gun Corps on the
Somme.

The Battle of Morval was an attack by the Fourth Army on Morval, Gueudecourt and
Lesboeufs held by the German 1st Army, which had been the final objectives of
the Battle of Flers–Courcelette (15–22 September). The attack was postponed to
combine with attacks by the French Sixth Army on Combles, south of Morval and
because of rain. The combined attack was also intended to deprive the German
defenders further west, near Thiepval of reinforcements, before an attack by the
Reserve Army, due on 26 September. Combles, Morval, Lesboeufs and Gueudecourt
were captured and a small number of tanks joined in the battle later in the
afternoon. Many casualties were inflicted on the Germans but the French made
slower progress. The Fourth Army advance on 25 September was its deepest since
14 July and left the Germans in severe difficulties, particularly in a salient
near Combles. The Reserve Army attack began on 26 September in the Battle of
Thiepval Ridge.

The Battle of Thiepval Ridge was the first large offensive mounted by the
Reserve Army of Lieutenant General Hubert Gough and was intended to benefit from
the Fourth Army attack at Morval by starting 24 hours afterwards. Thiepval Ridge
was well fortified and the German defenders fought with great determination,
while the British co-ordination of infantry and artillery declined after the
first day, due to confused fighting in the maze of trenches, dug-outs and
shell-craters. The final British objectives were not reached until the Battle of
the Ancre Heights (1 October – 11 November). Organisational difficulties and
deteriorating weather frustrated Joffre's intention to proceed by vigorous
co-ordinated attacks by the Anglo-French armies, which became disjointed and
declined in effectiveness during late September, at the same time as a revival
occurred in the German defence. The British experimented with new techniques in
gas warfare, machine-gun bombardment and tank–infantry co-operation, as the
Germans struggled to withstand the preponderance of men and material fielded by
the Anglo-French, despite reorganisation and substantial reinforcements of
troops, artillery and aircraft from Verdun. September became the worst month for
casualties for the Germans.

The Battle of Le Transloy began in good weather and Le Sars was captured on 7
October. Pauses were made from 8–11 October due to rain and 13–18 October to
allow time for a methodical bombardment, when it became clear that the German
defence had recovered from earlier defeats. Haig consulted with the army
commanders and on 17 October reduced the scope of operations by cancelling the
Third Army plans and reducing the Reserve Army and Fourth Army attacks to
limited operations, in co-operation with the French Sixth Army. Another pause
followed before operations resumed on 23 October on the northern flank of the
Fourth Army, with a delay during more bad weather on the right flank of the
Fourth Army and on the French Sixth Army front, until 5 November. Next day the
Fourth Army ceased offensive operations, except for small attacks intended to
improve positions and divert German attention from attacks being made by the
Reserve/Fifth Army. Larger operations resumed in January 1917.

The Battle of the Ancre Heights was fought after Haig made plans for the Third
Army to take the area east of Gommecourt, the Reserve Army to attack north from
Thiepval Ridge and east from Beaumont Hamel–Hébuterne and for the Fourth Army to
reach the Péronne–Bapaume road around Le Transloy and
Beaulencourt–Thilloy–Loupart Wood, north of the Albert–Bapaume road. The Reserve
Army attacked to complete the capture of Regina Trench/Stuff Trench, north of
Courcelette to the west end of Bazentin Ridge around Schwaben and Stuff
Redoubts, during which bad weather caused great hardship and delay. The Marine
Brigade from Flanders and fresh German divisions brought from quiet fronts
counter-attacked frequently and the British objectives were not secured until 11
November.

The Battle of the Ancre was the last big British operation of the year. The
Fifth (formerly Reserve) Army attacked into the Ancre valley to exploit German
exhaustion after the Battle of the Ancre Heights and gain ground ready for a
resumption of the offensive in 1917. Political calculation, concern for Allied
morale and Joffre's pressure for a continuation of attacks in France, to prevent
German troop transfers to Russia and Italy also influenced Haig. The battle
began with another mine being detonated beneath Hawthorn Ridge Redoubt. The
attack on Serre failed, although a brigade of the 31st Division, which had
attacked in the disaster of 1 July, took its objectives before being withdrawn
later. South of Serre, Beaumont Hamel and Beaucourt-sur-l'Ancre were captured.
South of the Ancre, St. Pierre Division was captured, the outskirts of
Grandcourt reached and the Canadian 4th Division captured Regina Trench north of
Courcelette, then took Desire Support Trench on 18 November. Until January 1917
a lull occurred, as both sides concentrated on enduring the weather.

At the start of 1916, most of the British Army had been an inexperienced and
patchily trained mass of volunteers. The Somme was the debut of the Kitchener
Army created by Lord Kitchener's call for recruits at the start of the war. The
British volunteers were often the fittest, most enthusiastic and best educated
citizens but British casualties were also inexperienced soldiers and it has been
claimed that their loss was of lesser military significance than the losses of
the remaining peace-trained officers and men of the German army. British
casualties on the first day were the worst in the history of the British army,
with 57,470 British casualties, 19,240 of whom were killed.

British survivors of the battle had gained experience and the BEF learned how to
conduct the mass industrial warfare, which the continental armies had been
fighting since 1914. The continental powers had begun the war with trained
armies of regulars and reservists, which were wasting assets. Crown Prince
Rupprecht of Bavaria wrote, "What remained of the old first-class peace-trained
German infantry had been expended on the battlefield". A war of attrition was a
logical strategy for Britain against Germany, which was also at war with France
and Russia. A school of thought holds that the Battle of the Somme placed
unprecedented strain on the German army and that after the battle it was unable
to replace casualties like-for-like, which reduced it to a militia.

The destruction of German units in battle was made worse by lack of rest.
British and French aircraft and long-range guns reached well behind the
front-line, where trench-digging and other work meant that troops returned to
the line exhausted. Despite the strategic predicament of the German army, it
survived the battle, withstood the pressure of the Brusilov Offensive, and
conducted an invasion of Romania. In 1917, the German army in the west survived
the large British and French offensives of the Nivelle Offensive and the Third
Battle of Ypres, though at great cost.

Falkenhayn was sacked and replaced by Hindenburg and Ludendorff at the end of
August 1916. At a conference at Cambrai on 5 September, a decision was taken to
build a new defensive line well behind the Somme front. The Siegfriedstellung
was to be built from Arras to St. Quentin, La Fère and Condé, with another new
line between Verdun and Pont-à-Mousson. These lines were intended to limit any
Allied breakthrough and to allow the German army to withdraw if attacked; work
began on the Siegfriedstellung (Hindenburg Line) at the end of September.
Withdrawing to the new line was not an easy decision and the German high command
struggled over it during the winter of 1916–1917. Some members wanted to take a
shorter step back, to a line between Arras and Sailly, while the First and
Second army commanders wanted to stay on the Somme. Generalleutnant von Fuchs on
20 January 1917 said that,

and that half measures were futile, retreating to the Siegfriedstellung was
unavoidable. After the loss of a considerable amount of ground around the Ancre
valley to the British Fifth Army in February 1917, the German armies on the
Somme were ordered on 14 February, to withdraw to reserve lines closer to
Bapaume. A further retirement to the Hindenburg Line (Siegfriedstellung) in
Operation Alberich began on 16 March 1917, despite the new line being unfinished
and poorly sited in some places.

The British and French had advanced about 6 mi (9.7 km) on the Somme, on a front
of 16 mi (26 km) at a cost of 419,654 to 432,000 British and about 200,000
French casualties, against 465,181 to 500,000 or perhaps even 600,000 German
casualties. Until the 1930s the dominant view of the battle in English-language
writing was that the battle was a hard-fought victory against a brave,
experienced and well-led opponent. Winston Churchill had objected to the way the
battle was being fought in August 1916, Lloyd George when Prime Minister
criticised attrition warfare frequently and condemned the battle in his post-war
memoirs. In the 1930s a new orthodoxy of "mud, blood and futility" emerged and
gained more emphasis in the 1960s when the 50th anniversaries of the Great War
battles were commemorated.

Until 1916, transport arrangements for the BEF were based on an assumption that
the war of movement would soon resume and make it pointless to build
infrastructure, since it would be left behind. The British relied on motor
transport from railheads which was insufficient where large masses of men and
guns were concentrated. When the Fourth Army advance resumed in August, the
wisdom of not building light railways which would be left behind was argued by
some, in favour of building standard gauge lines. Experience of crossing the
beaten zone, showed that such lines or metalled roads could not be built quickly
enough to sustain an advance and that pausing while communications caught up,
allowed the defenders to recover. On the Somme the daily carry during attacks on
a 12 mi (19 km) front was 20,000 long tons (20,000 t) and a few wood roads and
rail lines were inadequate for the number of lorries and roads. A comprehensive
system of transport was needed, which required a much greater diversion of
personnel and equipment than had been expected.

In 1931, Wendt published a comparison of German and British-French casualties
which showed an average of 30 percent more Allied casualties than German losses
on the Somme. In the first 1916 volume of the British Official History (1932),
J. E. Edmonds wrote that comparisons of casualties were inexact, because of
different methods of calculation by the belligerents but that British casualties
were 419,654, from total British casualties in France in the period of 498,054,
French Somme casualties were 194,451 and German casualties were c. 445,322, to
which should be added 27 percent for woundings, which would have been counted as
casualties using British criteria; Anglo-French casualties on the Somme were
over 600,000 and German casualties were under 600,000.

The addition by Edmonds of c. 30 percent to German figures, to make them
comparable to British criteria, was criticised as "spurious" by M. J. Williams
in 1964. McRandle and Quirk in 2006 cast doubt on the Edmonds calculations but
counted 729,000 German casualties on the Western Front from July to December
against 631,000 by Churchill, concluding that German losses were fewer than
Anglo-French casualties but the ability of the German army to inflict
disproportionate losses had been eroded by attrition. Sheffield wrote that the
calculation by Edmonds of Anglo-French casualties was correct but the one for
German casualties was discredited, quoting the official German figure of 500,000
casualties. In the second 1916 volume of the British Official History (1938),
Miles wrote that total German casualties in the battle were 660,000–680,000,
against Anglo-French casualties of fewer than 630,000, using "fresh data" from
the French and German official accounts.

In 1938, Churchill wrote that the Germans had suffered 270,000 casualties
against the French, between February and June 1916 and 390,000 between July and
the end of the year (see statistical tables in Appendix J of Churchill's World
Crisis) with 278,000 casualties at Verdun. Some losses must have been in quieter
sectors but many must have been inflicted by the French at the Somme. Churchill
wrote that Franco-German losses at the Somme, were "much less unequal" than the
Anglo-German ratio. During the Battle of the Somme German forces suffered
537,919 casualties, of which 338,011 losses were inflicted by the French and
199,908 losses by the British. In turn German forces inflicted 794,238
casualties on the Entente. Doughty wrote that French losses on the Somme were
"surprisingly high" at 202,567 men, 54% of the 377,231 casualties at Verdun.
Prior and Wilson used Churchill's research and wrote that the British lost
432,000 soldiers from 1 July – mid-November (c. 3,600 per day) in inflicting
c. 230,000 German casualties and offer no figures for French casualties or the
losses they inflicted on the Germans. Sheldon wrote that the British lost "over
400,000" casualties. Harris wrote that total British losses were c. 420,000,
French casualties were over 200,000 men and German losses were c. 500,000,
according to the "best" German sources. Sheffield wrote that the losses were
"appalling", with 419,000 British casualties, c. 204,000 French and perhaps
600,000 German casualties.

In a commentary on the debate about Somme casualties, Philpott used Miles's
figures of 419,654 British casualties and the French official figures of 154,446
Sixth Army losses and 48,131 Tenth Army casualties. German losses were described
as "disputed", ranging from 400,000–680,000. Churchill's claims were a
"snapshot" of July 1916 and not representative of the rest of the battle.
Philpott called the "blood test" a crude measure compared to manpower reserves,
industrial capacity, farm productivity and financial resources and that
intangible factors were more influential on the course of the war. The German
army was exhausted by the end of 1916, with loss of morale and the cumulative
effects of attrition and frequent defeats causing it to collapse in 1918, a
process which began on the Somme, echoing Churchill that the German soldiery was
never the same again.

After the Battle of the Ancre (13–18 November 1916), British attacks on the
Somme front were stopped by the weather and military operations by both sides
were mostly restricted to survival in the rain, snow, fog, mud fields,
waterlogged trenches and shell-holes. As preparations for the offensive at Arras
continued, the British attempted to keep German attention on the Somme front.
British operations on the Ancre from 10 January – 22 February 1917, forced the
Germans back 5 mi (8.0 km) on a 4 mi (6.4 km) front, ahead of the schedule of
the Alberich Bewegung (Alberich Manoeuvre/Operation Alberich) and eventually
took 5,284 prisoners. On 22/23 February, the Germans fell back another 3 mi
(4.8 km) on a 15 mi (24 km) front. The Germans then withdrew from much of the R.
I Stellung to the R. II Stellung on 11 March, forestalling a British attack,
which was not noticed by the British until dark on 12 March; the main German
withdrawal from the Noyon salient to the Hindenburg Line (Operation Alberich)
commenced on schedule on 16 March.

Defensive positions held by the German army on the Somme after November 1916
were in poor condition, the garrisons were exhausted and censors of
correspondence from front-line soldiers reported tiredness and low morale. The
situation left the German command doubtful that the army could withstand a
resumption of the battle. The German defence of the Ancre began to collapse
under British attacks, which on 28 January 1917 caused Rupprecht to urge that
the retirement to the Siegfriedstellung (Hindenburg Line) begin. Ludendorff
rejected the proposal next day but British attacks on the First Army,
particularly the Action of Miraumont (also known as the Battle of Boom Ravine,
17–18 February) caused Rupprecht on the night of 22 February to order a
preliminary withdrawal of c. 4 mi (6.4 km) to the R. I Stellung (R. I Position).
On 24 February the Germans withdrew, protected by rear guards, over roads in
relatively good condition which were then destroyed. The German withdrawal was
helped by a thaw, which turned roads behind the British front into bogs and by
disruption to the railways which supplied the Somme front. On the night of 12
March the Germans withdrew from the R. I Stellung between Bapaume and Achiet le
Petit and the British reached the R. II Stellung (R. II Position) on 13 March.

The Royal British Legion with the British Embassy in Paris and the Commonwealth
War Graves Commission, commemorate the battle on 1 July each year, at the
Thiepval Memorial to the Missing of the Somme. For their efforts on the first
day of the battle, The 1st Newfoundland Regiment was given the name "The Royal
Newfoundland Regiment" by George V on 28 November 1917. The first day of the
Battle of the Somme is commemorated in Newfoundland, remembering the "Best of
the Best" at 11:00 a.m. on the Sunday nearest to 1 July. The Somme is remembered
in Northern Ireland due to the participation of the 36th (Ulster) Division and
commemorated by veterans' groups and by unionist/Protestant groups such as the
Orange Order. The British Legion and others commemorate the battle on 1 July.

On 1 July 2016, at 7:28 am British Summer Time, the UK observed a two minute
silence to mark the start of the battle which began 100 years earlier. A special
ceremony was broadcast on BBC1 and all BBC radio stations participated in the
silence. At the start of the silence, the King's Troop, Royal Horse Artillery
fired a gun every four seconds for one hundred seconds and a whistle was blown
to end it. Just like a Remembrance Sunday silence, a bugler played The Last Post
after the silence. The silence was announced during a speech by the Prime
Minister David Cameron who said, "There will be a national two-minute silence on
Friday morning. I will be attending a service at the Thiepval Memorial near the
battlefield, and it's right that the whole country pauses to remember the
sacrifices of all those who fought and lost their lives in that conflict." On 1
July 2016, a ceremony was held in Heaton Park in north Manchester in England.
Heaton Park was the site of a large army training camp during the war.[citation
needed]

Across Britain on 1 July 2016, 1400 actors dressed in replica World War I-period
British Army uniforms walked about in streets and public open areas, from 7am to
7 pm. Each took on temporarily the identity of a British soldier who died on the
first day of the Somme, and handed out information cards about that soldier.
They did not talk, except for occasionally singing "We're here because we're
here" to the tune of Auld Lang Syne. This event was called "Ghost Soldiers".

The Battle of the Somme has been called the beginning of modern all-arms
warfare, during which Kitchener's Army learned to fight the mass-industrial war
in which the continental armies had been engaged for two years. This view sees
the British contribution to the battle as part of a coalition war and part of a
process, which took the strategic initiative from the German Army and caused it
irreparable damage, leading to its collapse in late 1918.

Haig and General Rawlinson have been criticised ever since 1916 for the human
cost of the battle and for failing to achieve their territorial objectives. On 1
August 1916 Winston Churchill criticised the British Army's conduct of the
offensive to the British Cabinet, claiming that though the battle had forced the
Germans to end their offensive at Verdun, attrition was damaging the British
armies more than the German armies. Though Churchill was unable to suggest an
alternative, a critical view of the British on the Somme has been influential in
English-language writing ever since. As recently as 2016, historian Peter Barton
argued in a series of three television programmes that the Battle of the Somme
should be regarded as a German defensive victory.

A rival conclusion by some historians (Terraine, Sheffield, Duffy, Chickering,
Herwig and Philpott et al.) is that there was no strategic alternative for the
British in 1916 and that an understandable horror at British losses is insular,
given the millions of casualties borne by the French and Russian armies since
1914. This school of thought sets the battle in a context of a general Allied
offensive in 1916 and notes that German and French writing on the battle puts it
in a continental perspective.

Little German and French writing on this topic has been translated, leaving much
of the continental perspective and detail of German and French military
operations inaccessible to the English-speaking world.

In current secondary education, the Battle of the Somme is barely mentioned in
German school curricula, while it features prominently in the United Kingdom. In
many British schools, variations of the question Does Haig deserve to be called
'The Butcher Of The Somme'? (Year 9) or To what extent can Sir Douglas Haig be
considered either a butcher or a hero of the First World War? (GCSE) are used to
teach pupils historical empathy, evaluation and argumentative writing skills.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Reimer

David Peter Reimer (August 22, 1965 – May 4, 2004) was a Canadian man born
biologically male but reassigned as a girl and raised female following medical
advice and intervention after his penis was accidentally destroyed during a
botched circumcision in infancy.

Psychologist John Money oversaw the case and reported the reassignment as
successful and as evidence that gender identity is primarily learned. Academic
sexologist Milton Diamond later reported that Reimer failed to identify as
female since the age of 9 to 11, and transitioned to living as a male at age 15.
Well known in medical circles for years anonymously as the "John/Joan" case,
Reimer later went public with his story to help discourage similar medical
practices. He later committed suicide after suffering years of severe
depression, financial instability, and a troubled marriage.

David Reimer was born in Winnipeg, Manitoba. He was originally named Bruce, and
his identical twin was named Brian. At the age of six months, after concern was
raised about how both of them urinated, the boys were diagnosed with
phimosis.:10 They were referred for circumcision at the age of seven months. On
April 27, 1966, a urologist performed the operation using the unconventional
method of cauterization,:11–13 but the procedure did not go as doctors had
planned, and Bruce's penis was burned beyond surgical repair. The doctors chose
not to operate on Brian, whose phimosis soon cleared without surgical
intervention.

The parents, concerned about their son's prospects for future happiness and
sexual function without a penis, took him to Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore
in early 1967 to see John Money,:49 a psychologist who was developing a
reputation as a pioneer in the field of sexual development and gender identity,
based on his work with intersex patients. Money was a prominent proponent of the
"theory of Gender Neutrality"—that gender identity developed primarily as a
result of social learning from early childhood and that it could be changed with
the appropriate behavioral interventions.:33–34 The Reimers had seen Money being
interviewed in February 1967:39 on the Canadian news program This Hour Has Seven
Days,:18 during which he discussed his theories about gender.:19–22

Money and physicians working with young children born with abnormal genitalia
believed that a penis could not be replaced but that a functional vagina could
be constructed surgically.[citation needed]

Money claimed that Reimer would be more likely to achieve successful, functional
sexual maturation as a girl than as a boy.[page needed][not in citation given]
For Money, a case where identical twin boys were involved where one could be
raised as a girl provided a perfect test of his theories.

Money and the Hopkins team persuaded the baby's parents that sex reassignment
surgery would be in Reimer's best interest.:50–52 At the age of 22 months, baby
Bruce underwent a bilateral orchidectomy, in which his testes were surgically
removed and a rudimentary vulva was fashioned.:53–54 Bruce was reassigned to be
raised as female and given the name Brenda. Psychological support for the
reassignment and surgery was provided by John Money, who continued to see Reimer
annually for about a decade for consultations and to assess the outcome. This
reassignment was considered an especially valid test case of the social learning
concept of gender identity for two reasons: First, Reimer's identical twin
brother, Brian, made an ideal control because the brothers shared genes, family
environments, and the intrauterine environment. Second, this was reputed to be
the first reassignment and reconstruction performed on a male infant who had no
abnormality of prenatal or early postnatal sexual differentiation.

Reimer said that Dr. Money forced the twins to rehearse sexual acts involving
"thrusting movements", with David playing the bottom role. Reimer said that, as
a child, he had to get "down on all fours" with his brother, Brian Reimer, "up
behind his butt" with "his crotch against" his "buttocks". Reimer said that Dr.
Money forced David, in another sexual position, to have his "legs spread" with
Brian on top. Reimer said that Dr. Money also forced the children to take their
"clothes off" and engage in "genital inspections". On at "least one occasion",
Reimer said that Dr. Money took a photograph of the two children doing these
activities. Dr. Money's rationale for these various treatments was his belief
that "childhood 'sexual rehearsal play'" was important for a "healthy adult
gender identity".[page needed]

For several years, Money reported on Reimer's progress as the "John/Joan case",
describing apparently successful female gender development and using this case
to support the feasibility of sex reassignment and surgical reconstruction even
in non-intersex cases. Money wrote, "The child's behavior is so clearly that of
an active little girl and so different from the boyish ways of her twin
brother." Notes by a former student at Money's lab state that, during the
follow-up visits, which occurred only once a year, Reimer's parents routinely
lied to lab staff about the success of the procedure. The twin brother, Brian,
later developed schizophrenia.

Reimer had experienced the visits to Baltimore as traumatic rather than
therapeutic, and when Dr. Money started pressuring the family to bring him in
for surgery during which a vagina would be constructed, the family discontinued
the follow-up visits. From 22 months into his teenaged years, Reimer urinated
through a hole that surgeons had placed in the abdomen. Estrogen was given
during adolescence to induce breast development.

His case came to international attention in 1997 when he told his story to
Milton Diamond, an academic sexologist who persuaded Reimer to allow him to
report the outcome in order to dissuade physicians from treating other infants
similarly. Soon after, Reimer went public with his story, and John Colapinto
published a widely disseminated and influential account in Rolling Stone
magazine in December 1997.

This was later expanded into a full-length book As Nature Made Him: The Boy Who
Was Raised as a Girl, in which Colapinto described how—contrary to Money's
reports—when living as Brenda, Reimer did not identify as a girl. He was
ostracized and bullied by peers, and neither frilly dresses (which he was forced
to wear during frigid Winnipeg winters) nor female hormones made him feel
female. By the age of 13, Reimer was experiencing suicidal depression, and he
told his parents he would take his own life if they made him see John Money
again. Finally on March 14, 1980, Reimer's parents told him the truth about his
gender reassignment, following advice from Reimer's endocrinologist and
psychiatrist. At 14, having been informed of his past by his father, Reimer
decided to assume a male gender identity, calling himself David. By 1987, Reimer
had undergone treatment to reverse the reassignment, including testosterone
injections, a double mastectomy, and two phalloplasty operations. On September
22, 1990, he married Jane Fontaine and adopted her three children.[citation
needed]

In addition to his difficult lifelong relationship with his parents, Reimer had
to deal with unemployment and the death of his brother Brian from an overdose of
antidepressants on July 1, 2002. On May 2, 2004, his wife Jane told him she
wanted to separate. On the morning of May 4, 2004, Reimer drove to a grocery
store's parking lot and took his own life by shooting himself in the head with a
sawed-off shotgun. He was 38 years old.

For the first thirty years after Dr. Money's initial report that the
reassignment had been a success, Dr. Money's view of the malleability of gender
became the dominant viewpoint among physicians and doctors, reassuring them that
sexual reassignment was the correct decision in certain instances, resulting in
thousands of sexual reassignments.

The report and subsequent book about Reimer influenced several medical
practices, reputations, and even current understanding of the biology of gender.
The case accelerated the decline of sex reassignment and surgery for unambiguous
XY infants with micropenis, various other rare congenital malformations, or
penile loss in infancy.

David Reimer has often been mentioned by Intactivists, who use him as an example
of what could happen to a man if his parents decide to circumcise him at birth,
and the effect it can have on him throughout his life. Only a few years after
David Reimer's birth, Canada began taking a stance against infant circumcision,
and it is now uncommon there.

Colapinto's book described unpleasant childhood therapy sessions, implying that
Money had ignored or concealed the developing evidence that Reimer's
reassignment to female was not going well. Money's defenders have suggested that
some of the allegations about the therapy sessions may have been the result of
false memory syndrome and that the family was not honest with researchers.

The case has also been treated by Judith Butler in her 2004 book Undoing Gender,
which examines gender, sex, psychoanalysis, and the medical treatment of
intersex people. The case of Reimer is used to re-examine Butler's theory of
performativity that she originally explored in Gender Trouble.

The BBC science series Horizon based two episodes on his life. "The Boy Who Was
Turned into a Girl" aired in 2000 and "Dr. Money and the Boy with No Penis" in
2004.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Game_of_Thrones

Game of Thrones is an American fantasy drama television series created by David
Benioff and D. B. Weiss. It is an adaptation of A Song of Ice and Fire, George
R. R. Martin's series of fantasy novels, the first of which is A Game of
Thrones. It is filmed at Titanic Studios in Belfast, on location in the United
Kingdom, and in Croatia, Iceland, Malta, Morocco, Spain, and the United States.
The series premiered on HBO in the United States on April 17, 2011, and its
sixth season ended on June 26, 2016. The series was renewed for a seventh
season, which is scheduled to premiere on July 16, 2017. The series will
conclude with its eighth season in 2018.

Set on the fictional continents of Westeros and Essos, Game of Thrones has
several plot lines and a large ensemble cast. The first story arc follows a
dynastic conflict among competing claimants for succession to the Iron Throne of
the Seven Kingdoms, with other noble families fighting for independence from the
throne. The second covers attempts to reclaim the throne by the exiled last
scion of the realm's deposed ruling dynasty; the third chronicles the threat of
the impending winter and the legendary creatures and fierce peoples of the
North.

Game of Thrones has attracted record viewership on HBO and has a broad, active,
international fan base. It has been acclaimed by critics, particularly for its
acting, complex characters, story, scope, and production values, although its
frequent use of nudity and violence (including sexual violence) has attracted
criticism. The series has received 38 Primetime Emmy Awards, including
Outstanding Drama Series in 2015 and 2016, more than any other primetime
scripted television series. Its other awards and nominations include three Hugo
Awards for Best Dramatic Presentation (2012–2014), a 2011 Peabody Award, and
four nominations for the Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series – Drama
(2012 and 2015–2017). Of the ensemble cast, Peter Dinklage has won two Primetime
Emmy Awards for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series (2011 and 2015)
and the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Series, Miniseries or
Television Film (2012) for his performance as Tyrion Lannister. Lena Headey,
Emilia Clarke, Kit Harington, Maisie Williams, Diana Rigg, and Max von Sydow
have also received Primetime Emmy Award nominations for their performances in
the series.

Game of Thrones is roughly based on the storylines of A Song of Ice and Fire,
set in the fictional Seven Kingdoms of Westeros and the continent of Essos. The
series chronicles the violent dynastic struggles among the realm's noble
families for the Iron Throne, while other families fight for independence from
it. It opens with additional threats in the icy North and Essos in the east.

Showrunner David Benioff jokingly suggested "The Sopranos in Middle-earth" as
Game of Thrones' tagline, referring to its intrigue-filled plot and dark tone in
a fantasy setting of magic and dragons. In a 2012 study of deaths per episode,
it ranked second out of 40 recent U.S. TV drama series (with an average of 14).

The series is generally praised for what is perceived as a sort of medieval
realism. George R.R. Martin set out to make the story feel more like historical
fiction than contemporary fantasy, with less emphasis on magic and sorcery and
more on battles, political intrigue, and the characters, believing that magic
should be used moderately in the epic fantasy genre. Benioff said, "George
brought a measure of harsh realism to high fantasy. He introduced gray tones
into a black-and-white universe."

A common theme in the fantasy genre is the battle between good and evil, which
Martin says does not mirror the real world. Just like people's capacity for good
and for evil in real life, Martin explores the questions of redemption and
character change. The show allows the audience to view different characters from
their perspective, unlike in many other fantasies, and thus the supposed
villains can provide their side of the story.

Main characters are regularly killed off, and this has been credited with
developing tension among viewers. The series also reflects the substantial death
rates in war.

Although the first season is a faithful adaptation of the novel, later seasons
have significant changes. According to David Benioff, the show is "about
adapting the series as a whole and following the map George laid out for us and
hitting the major milestones, but not necessarily each of the stops along the
way".

The novels and their adaptations base aspects of their settings, characters, and
plot on events in European history. A principal inspiration for the novels is
the English Wars of the Roses (1455–85) between the houses of Lancaster and
York, reflected in Martin's houses of Lannister and Stark. Most of Westeros is
reminiscent of high medieval western Europe, from lands and cultures, to the
palace intrigue, castles, and knightly tournaments. The scheming Cersei evokes
Isabella, the "she-wolf of France" (1295–1358); Isabella and her family
(particularly as portrayed in Maurice Druon's historical-novel series, The
Accursed Kings) inspired Martin. Other historical antecedents of series elements
include Hadrian's Wall (which becomes Martin's Wall), the legend of Atlantis
(ancient Valyria), Byzantine Greek fire ("wildfire"), Damascus steel (Valyrian
steel), the Colossus of Rhodes (the Titan of Braavos), Ancient Egypt (Slaver's
Bay), the Crusades (the Faith Militant), Icelandic sagas of the Viking Age (the
Ironborn), the Mongol hordes (the Dothraki), the Hundred Years' War (1337–1453),
and the Italian Renaissance (c. 1400–1500). The series' popularity has been
attributed, in part, to Martin's skill at fusing these elements into a seamless,
credible version of alternate history.

Game of Thrones has an ensemble cast estimated as the largest on television;
during its third season, 257 cast names were recorded. In 2014, several actor
contracts were renegotiated to include a seventh-season option, with raises
which reportedly made them among the highest-paid performers on cable TV. The
main cast is listed below.

Lord Eddard "Ned" Stark (Sean Bean) is the head of House Stark, whose members
are involved in most of the series' plot lines. He and his wife, Catelyn Tully
(Michelle Fairley), have five children: Robb (Richard Madden), the eldest,
followed by Sansa (Sophie Turner), Arya (Maisie Williams), Bran (Isaac
Hempstead-Wright) and Rickon (Art Parkinson), the youngest. Ned's illegitimate
son Jon Snow (Kit Harington) and his friend, Samwell Tarly (John Bradley), serve
in the Night's Watch under Lord Commander Jeor Mormont (James Cosmo). The
Wildlings living north of the Wall include warriors Tormund Giantsbane
(Kristofer Hivju), Ygritte (Rose Leslie) and young Gilly (Hannah Murray).

Others associated with House Stark include Ned's ward Theon Greyjoy (Alfie
Allen), his vassal Roose Bolton (Michael McElhatton), and Bolton's bastard son,
Ramsay Snow (Iwan Rheon). Robb falls in love with the healer Talisa Maegyr (Oona
Chaplin), and Arya befriends blacksmith's apprentice Gendry (Joe Dempsie) and
assassin Jaqen H'ghar (Tom Wlaschiha). The tall warrior Brienne of Tarth
(Gwendoline Christie) serves Catelyn and, later, Sansa.

In King's Landing, the capital, Ned's friend King Robert Baratheon (Mark Addy)
shares a loveless marriage with Cersei Lannister (Lena Headey) – who has taken
her twin, the Kingslayer Ser Jaime Lannister (Nikolaj Coster-Waldau), as her
lover. She loathes her younger brother, the dwarf Tyrion Lannister (Peter
Dinklage), who is attended by his mistress Shae (Sibel Kekilli) and the
sellsword Bronn (Jerome Flynn). Cersei's father is Lord Tywin Lannister (Charles
Dance). Cersei also has two young sons: Joffrey (Jack Gleeson) and Tommen
(Dean-Charles Chapman). Joffrey is guarded by the scar-faced warrior, Sandor
"the Hound" Clegane (Rory McCann).

The king's Small Council of advisors includes crafty Master of Coin Lord Petyr
"Littlefinger" Baelish (Aidan Gillen) and eunuch spymaster Lord Varys (Conleth
Hill). Robert's brother, Stannis Baratheon (Stephen Dillane), is advised by
foreign priestess Melisandre (Carice van Houten) and former smuggler Ser Davos
Seaworth (Liam Cunningham). The wealthy Tyrell family is primarily represented
at court by Margaery Tyrell (Natalie Dormer). The High Sparrow (Jonathan Pryce)
is the capital's principal religious leader. In the southern principality of
Dorne, Ellaria Sand (Indira Varma) seeks vengeance against the Lannisters.

Across the Narrow Sea, siblings Viserys (Harry Lloyd) and Daenerys Targaryen
(Emilia Clarke) – the exiled children of the last king of the original ruling
dynasty, who was overthrown by Robert Baratheon – are running for their lives
and trying to win back the throne. Daenerys has been married to Khal Drogo
(Jason Momoa), the leader of the nomadic Dothraki. Her retinue includes exiled
knight Ser Jorah Mormont (Iain Glen), her aide Missandei (Nathalie Emmanuel) and
the sellsword Daario Naharis (Michiel Huisman).

In January 2006, George R. R. Martin's literary agent sent the first four books
of A Song of Ice and Fire to David Benioff after a phone conversation. Benioff
read a few hundred pages of the first novel, A Game of Thrones, shared his
enthusiasm with D. B. Weiss and suggested that they adapt Martin's novels into a
television series; Weiss finished the first novel in "maybe 36 hours". They
pitched the series to HBO after a five-hour meeting with Martin (a veteran
screenwriter) in a restaurant on Santa Monica Boulevard. According to Benioff,
they won Martin over with their answer to his question, "Who is Jon Snow's
mother?" Asked about why they decided to turn the novels into an HBO show
instead of a feature film, Benioff said that it would be impossible, considering
that the scale of the novels is too big for a feature film and would mean dozen
of characters would be discarded. Benioff also added, "a fantasy movie of this
scope, financed by a major studio, would almost certainly need a PG-13 rating.
That means no sex, no blood, no profanity. Fuck that."

The series began development in January 2007. HBO acquired the TV rights to the
novels, and Benioff and Weiss were its executive producers. The intention was
for each novel to yield a season's worth of episodes. Initially, Benioff and
Weiss were to write every episode except one per season which was reserved for
Martin (who was co-executive producer). Jane Espenson and Bryan Cogman were
later added to write one episode apiece the first season.

The first and second drafts of the pilot script by Benioff and Weiss were
submitted in August 2007 and June 2008, respectively. Although HBO liked both
drafts, a pilot was not ordered until November 2008; the 2007–2008 Writers Guild
of America strike may have delayed the process. The pilot episode, "Winter Is
Coming", was first shot in 2009; after a poor reception in a private viewing,
HBO demanded an extensive re-shoot (about 90 percent of the episode, with cast
and directorial changes).

The pilot reportedly cost HBO $5–10 million, and the first season's budget was
estimated at $50–60 million. In the second season, the show received a
15-percent budget increase for the climactic battle in "Blackwater" (which had
an $8 million budget). Between 2012 and 2015, the average budget per episode
increased from $6 million to "at least" $8 million. The sixth-season budget was
over $10 million per episode, for a season total of over $100 million and a
series record.

Nina Gold and Robert Sterne are the series' primary casting directors. Through a
process of auditions and readings, the main cast was assembled. The only
exceptions were Peter Dinklage and Sean Bean, whom the writers wanted from the
start; they were announced as joining the pilot in 2009. Other actors signed for
the pilot were Kit Harington as Jon Snow, Jack Gleeson as Joffrey Baratheon,
Harry Lloyd as Viserys Targaryen and Mark Addy as Robert Baratheon. Catelyn
Stark was scheduled to be played by Jennifer Ehle, but the role was recast with
Michelle Fairley. Daenerys Targaryen was also recast, with Emilia Clarke
replacing Tamzin Merchant. The rest of the first season's cast was filled in the
second half of 2009.

Although many of the first-season cast were set to return, the producers had a
large number of new characters to cast for the second season. Due to this,
Benioff and Weiss postponed the introduction of several key characters and
merged several characters into one or assigned plot functions to different
characters.

Game of Thrones used seven writers in six seasons. Series creators David Benioff
and D. B. Weiss, the showrunners, write most of the episodes each season.

A Song of Ice and Fire author George R. R. Martin wrote one episode in each of
the first four seasons. Martin did not write an episode for the fifth or sixth
seasons, since he wanted to focus on completing the sixth novel (The Winds of
Winter). Jane Espenson co-wrote one first-season episode as a freelance writer.

Bryan Cogman, initially a script coordinator for the series, was promoted to
producer for the fifth season. Cogman, who wrote at least one episode for the
first five seasons, is the only other writer in the writers' room with Benioff
and Weiss. Before his promotion, Vanessa Taylor (a writer during the second and
third seasons) worked closely with Benioff and Weiss. Dave Hill joined the
writing staff for the fifth season after working as an assistant to Benioff and
Weiss. Although Martin is not in the writers' room, he reads the script outlines
and makes comments.

Benioff and Weiss sometimes assign characters to particular writers; for
example, Cogman was assigned to Arya Stark for the fourth season. The writers
spend several weeks writing a character outline, including what material from
the novels to use and the overarching themes. After these individual outlines
are complete, they spend another two to three weeks discussing each main
character's individual arc and arranging them episode by episode. A detailed
outline is created, with each of the writers working on a portion to create a
script for each episode. Cogman, who wrote two episodes for the fifth season,
took a month and a half to complete both scripts. They are then read by Benioff
and Weiss, who make notes, and parts of the script are rewritten. All ten
episodes are written before filming begins, since they are filmed out of order
with two units in different countries.

Benioff and Weiss intend to adapt the entire, still-incomplete A Song of Ice and
Fire series of novels for television. After Game of Thrones began outpacing the
published novels in the sixth season, the series was based on a plot outline of
the future novels provided by Martin and original content. In April 2016, the
showrunners' plan was to shoot 13 more episodes after the sixth season: seven
episodes in the seventh season and six episodes in the eighth. Later that month,
the series was renewed for a seventh season with a seven-episode order. As of
2016, seven seasons have been ordered; six have been filmed, adapting the novels
at a rate of about 48 seconds per page for the first three seasons.

The first two seasons adapted one novel each. For the later seasons, its
creators see Game of Thrones as an adaptation of A Song of Ice and Fire as a
whole rather than the individual novels; this enables them to move events across
novels, according to screen-adaptation requirements.

Principal photography for the first season was scheduled to begin on July 26,
2010, and the primary location was the Paint Hall Studios in Belfast, Northern
Ireland. Exterior scenes in Northern Ireland were filmed at Sandy Brae in the
Mourne Mountains (standing in for Vaes Dothrak), Castle Ward (Winterfell),
Saintfield Estates (the Winterfell godswood), Tollymore Forest (outdoor scenes),
Cairncastle (the execution site), the Magheramorne quarry (Castle Black) and
Shane's Castle (the tourney grounds). Doune Castle in Stirling, Scotland, was
also used in the original pilot episode for scenes at Winterfell. The producers
initially considered filming the whole series in Scotland, but decided on
Northern Ireland because of the availability of studio space.

The first season's southern scenes were filmed in Malta, a change in location
from the pilot episode's Moroccan sets. The city of Mdina was used for King's
Landing. Filming was also done at Fort Manoel (representing the Sept of Baelor);
at the Azure Window on the island of Gozo (the Dothraki wedding site) and at San
Anton Palace, Fort Ricasoli, Fort St Angelo and St. Dominic monastery (all used
for scenes in the Red Keep).

Filming of the second season's southern scenes shifted from Malta to Croatia,
where the city of Dubrovnik and nearby locations allowed exterior shots of a
walled, coastal medieval city. The Walls of Dubrovnik and Fort Lovrijenac were
used for scenes in King's Landing and the Red Keep. The island of Lokrum, the
St. Dominic monastery in the coastal town of Trogir, the Rector's Palace in
Dubrovnik, and the Dubac quarry (a few kilometers east) were used for scenes set
in Qarth. Scenes set north of the Wall, in the Frostfangs and at the Fist of the
First Men, were filmed in November 2011 in Iceland: on the Vatnajökull glacier
near Smyrlabjörg, the Svínafellsjökull glacier near Skaftafell and the
Mýrdalsjökull glacier near Vik on Höfðabrekkuheiði.

Third-season production returned to Dubrovnik, with the Walls of Dubrovnik, Fort
Lovrijenac and nearby locations again used for scenes in King's Landing and the
Red Keep. Trsteno Arboretum, a new location, is the garden of the Tyrells in
King's Landing. The third season also returned to Morocco (including the city of
Essaouira) to film Daenerys' scenes in Essos. Dimmuborgir and the Grjótagjá cave
in Iceland were used as well. One scene, with a live bear, was filmed in Los
Angeles. The production used three units (Dragon, Wolf and Raven) filming in
parallel, six directing teams, 257 cast members and 703 crew members.

The fourth season returned to Dubrovnik and included new locations, including
Diocletian's Palace in Split, Klis Fortress north of Split, Perun quarry east of
Split, the Mosor mountain range, and Baška Voda further south. Thingvellir
National Park in Iceland was used for the fight between Brienne and the Hound.
Filming took 136 days and ended on November 21, 2013. The fifth season added
Seville, Spain, used for scenes of Dorne. The sixth season, which began filming
in July 2015, returned to Spain and filmed in Girona and Peniscola.
Seventh-season production is scheduled to return to Spain, filming in Seville,
Cáceres, Almodovar del Rio, Santiponce, Zumaia and Bermeo.

Filming of the seven episodes of Season 7 began on August 31, 2016 at Titanic
Studios in Belfast, with location work to be done in Iceland, Northern Ireland
and many locations in Spain. Filming will continue until the end of February
2017 as necessary to ensure winter weather in some of the European locations.

Each ten-episode season of Game of Thrones has four to six directors, who
usually direct back-to-back episodes. Alex Graves, David Nutter, and Alan Taylor
have directed the most episodes of the series, with six each. Daniel Minahan
directed five episodes, and Michelle MacLaren, Mark Mylod, Jeremy Podeswa, Alik
Sakharov, and Miguel Sapochnik directed four each. Brian Kirk directed three
episodes during the first season, and Tim Van Patten directed the series' first
two episodes. Neil Marshall directed two episodes, both with large battle
scenes: "Blackwater" and "The Watchers on the Wall". Other directors have been
Jack Bender, David Petrarca, Daniel Sackheim and Michael Slovis. Matt Shakman
will direct at least one episode of the upcoming seventh season. David Benioff
and D. B. Weiss have also directed one episode each.

Alik Sakharov was the pilot's cinematographer. The series has had a number of
cinematographers, and has received seven Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding
Cinematography for a Single-Camera Series nominations.

Oral Norrey Ottey, Frances Parker, Martin Nicholson, Crispin Green, Tim Porter
and Katie Weiland have edited the series for a varying number of episodes.
Weiland received a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Single-Camera Picture
Editing for a Drama Series in 2015.

Michele Clapton was costume designer for Game of Thrones' first five seasons
before she was replaced by April Ferry. Clapton will return to the show as
costume designer for the seventh season.

The series' costumes are inspired by a number of cultures, including medieval
Japan and Persia. Dothraki dress resembles that of the Bedouin (one was made out
of fish skins to resemble dragon scales), and the Wildlings wear animal skins
like the Inuit. Wildling bone armor is made from molds of actual bones, and is
assembled with string and latex resembling catgut. Although the extras who play
Wildlings and the Night's Watch often wear hats (normal in a cold climate),
members of the principal cast usually do not so viewers can distinguish the main
characters. Björk's Alexander McQueen high-neckline dresses inspired Margaery
Tyrell's funnel-neck outfit, and prostitutes' dresses are designed for easy
removal. All clothing is aged for two weeks so it appears realistic on
high-definition television.

About two dozen wigs are used for the actresses. Made of human hair and up to 2
feet (61 cm) in length, they cost up to $7,000 each and are washed and styled
like real hair. Applying the wigs is time-consuming; Emilia Clarke, for example,
requires about two hours to style her brunette hair with a platinum-blonde wig
and braids. Other actors, such as Jack Gleeson and Sophie Turner, receive
frequent hair coloring. For characters such as Daenerys (Clarke) and her
Dothraki, their hair, wigs and costumes are processed to appear as if they have
not been washed for weeks.

For the first three seasons, Paul Engelen was Game of Thrones' main makeup
designer and prosthetic makeup artist with Melissa Lackersteen, Conor O'Sullivan
and Rob Trenton. At the beginning of the fourth season Engelen's team was
replaced by Jane Walker and her crew, composed of Ann McEwan and Barrie and
Sarah Gower.

For the series' large number of visual effects, HBO hired British-based BlueBolt
and Irish-based Screen Scene for season one. Most of the environment builds were
done as 2.5D projections, giving viewers perspective while keeping the
programming from being overwhelming. In 2011 the season-one finale, "Fire and
Blood", was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Special Visual
Effects.

Because the effects became more complex in subsequent seasons (including CGI
creatures, fire, and water), German-based Pixomondo became the lead
visual-effects producer; nine of its twelve facilities contributed to the
project for season two, with Stuttgart the lead. Scenes were also produced by
British-based Peanut FX, Canadian-based Spin VFX, and U.S.-based Gradient
Effects. "Valar Morghulis" and "Valar Dohaeris" earned Pixomondo Primetime Emmy
Awards for Outstanding Special Visual Effects in 2012 and 2013, respectively.

For season four, HBO added German-based Mackevision to the project. The
season-four finale, "The Children", won the 2014 Emmy Award for Visual Effects.
Additional producers for season four included Canadian-based Rodeo FX,
German-based Scanline VFX and U.S.-based BAKED FX. The muscle and wing movements
of the adolescent dragons in seasons four and five were based largely on those
of a chicken. Pixomondo retained a team of 22 to 30 people which focused on
visualizing Daenerys Targaryen's dragons, with the average production time per
season of 20 to 22 weeks. For the fifth season, HBO added Canadian-based Image
Engine and U.S.-based Crazy Horse Effects to its list of main visual-effects
producers.

Unusual for a television series, the sound team receives a rough cut of a full
season and approaches it as a ten-hour feature film. Although seasons one and
two had different sound teams, one team has been in charge of sound since then.
For the show's blood-and-gore sounds, the team often uses a shammy. For dragon
screams, mating tortoises and dolphin, seal, lion and bird sounds have been
used.

The series' title sequence was created by production studio Elastic for HBO.
Creative director Angus Wall and his collaborators received the 2011 Primetime
Emmy Award for Main Title Design for the sequence, which depicts a
three-dimensional map of the series' fictional world. The map is projected on
the inside of a sphere which is centrally lit by a small sun in an armillary
sphere. As the camera moves across the map, focusing on the locations of the
episode's events, clockwork mechanisms intertwine and allow buildings and other
structures to emerge from the map. Accompanied by the title music, the names of
the principal cast and creative staff appear. The sequence concludes after about
90 seconds with the title card and brief opening credits indicating the
episode's writer(s) and director. Its composition changes as the story
progresses, with new locations replacing those featuring less prominently or not
at all.

The music for the series was composed by Ramin Djawadi. The first season's
soundtrack, written in about ten weeks before the show's premiere, was published
by Varèse Sarabande in June 2011. Soundtrack albums for subsequent seasons have
been released, with tracks by the National, the Hold Steady and Sigur Rós.
Djawadi has composed themes for each of the major houses and also for some of
the main characters. The themes may evolve over time, as Daenerys Targaryen's
theme started small and then became more powerful after each season. Her theme
started first with a single instrument, a cello, and Djawadi later incorporated
more instruments for it.

The Westerosi characters of Game of Thrones speak British English, often (but
not consistently) with the accent of the English region corresponding to the
character's Westerosi region; Eddard Stark (Warden of the North) speaks in actor
Sean Bean's native northern accent, and the southern lord Tywin Lannister speaks
with a southern accent. Characters foreign to Westeros often have a non-British
accent.

Although English is the common language of Westeros, the producers charged
linguist David J. Peterson with constructing Dothraki and Valyrian languages
based on the few words in the novels; Dothraki and Valyrian dialogue is
subtitled in English. According to the BBC, during the series these fictional
languages have been heard by more people than the Welsh, Irish and Scots Gaelic
languages combined.

Game of Thrones is funded by Northern Ireland Screen, a UK government agency
financed by Invest NI and the European Regional Development Fund. As of April
2013, Northern Ireland Screen gave the show £9.25 million ($14.37 million);
according to government estimates, this has benefited the Northern Ireland
economy by £65 million ($100.95 million).

Tourism Ireland has a Game of Thrones-themed marketing campaign similar to New
Zealand's Tolkien-related advertising. Invest NI and the Northern Ireland
Tourist Board also expect the series to generate tourism revenue. According to
Arlene Foster, the series has given Northern Ireland the most non-political
publicity in its history. The production of Game of Thrones and other TV series
also boosted Northern Ireland's creative industries, contributing to an
estimated 12.4-percent growth in arts, entertainment and recreation jobs between
2008 and 2013 (compared with 4.3 percent in the rest of the UK during the same
period).

Tourism organizations elsewhere reported increases in bookings after their
locations appeared in Game of Thrones. In 2012, bookings through LateRooms.com
increased by 28 percent in Dubrovnik and 13 percent in Iceland. The following
year, bookings doubled in Ouarzazate, Morocco (the location of Daenerys'
season-three scenes).

Game of Thrones is broadcast by HBO in the United States and by its local
subsidiaries or other pay television services in other countries, at the same
time as in the U.S. or weeks (or months) later. The series' broadcast in China
on CCTV, begun in 2014, was heavily edited to remove scenes of sex and violence
in accordance with a Chinese practice of censoring Western TV series to prevent
what the People's Daily calls "negative effects and hidden security dangers".
This resulted in viewer complaints about the incoherence of what remained.
Broadcasters carrying Game of Thrones include Showcase in Australia; HBO Canada,
Super Écran and Showcase in Canada; SoHo and Prime in New Zealand, and Sky
Atlantic in the United Kingdom and Ireland.

The ten episodes of the first season of Game of Thrones were released as a DVD
and Blu-ray box set on March 6, 2012. The box set includes extra background and
behind-the-scenes material but no deleted scenes, since nearly all the footage
shot for the first season was used in the show. The box set sold over 350,000
copies in the first week after release, the largest first-week DVD sales ever
for an HBO series, and the series set an HBO-series record for digital-download
sales. A collector's-edition box set was released in November 2012, combining
the DVD and Blu-ray versions of the first season with the first episode of
season two. A paperweight in the shape of a dragon egg is included in the set.

DVD-Blu-ray box sets and digital downloads of the second season became available
on February 19, 2013. First-day sales broke HBO records, with 241,000 box sets
sold and 355,000 episodes downloaded. The third season was made available for
purchase as a digital download on the Australian iTunes Store, parallel to the
U.S. premiere, and was released on DVD and Blu-ray in region 1 on February 18,
2014. The fourth season was released on DVD and Blu-ray on February 17, 2015,
and the fifth season on March 15, 2016. The sixth season was released on Blu-ray
and DVD on November 15, 2016.

Game of Thrones has been widely pirated, primarily outside the U.S. According to
the file-sharing news website TorrentFreak, Game of Thrones has been the
most-pirated TV series each year since 2012. Illegal downloads increased to
about seven million in the first quarter of 2015, up 45 percent from 2014. An
unnamed episode was downloaded about 4,280,000 times through public BitTorrent
trackers in 2012, roughly equal to its number of broadcast viewers. Piracy rates
were particularly high in Australia, and U.S. Ambassador to Australia Jeff
Bleich issued a statement condemning Australian piracy of the series in 2013.

Delays in availability apart from HBO and its affiliates before 2015 and the
cost of subscriptions to these services have been cited as causes of the series'
illegal distribution. According to TorrentFreak, a subscription to a service for
Game of Thrones would cost up to $25 per month in the United States, up to £26
per episode in the UK and up to $52 per episode in Australia.

For "combating piracy", HBO said in 2013 that it intended to make its content
more widely available within a week of the U.S. premiere (including HBO Go). In
2015, the fifth season was simulcast to 170 countries and to HBO Now users. On
April 11, the day before the season premiere, screener copies of the first four
episodes of the fifth season leaked to a number of file-sharing websites. Within
a day of the leak, the files were downloaded over 800,000 times; in one week the
illegal downloads reached 32 million, with the season-five premiere alone ("The
Wars to Come") pirated 13 million times. The season-five finale ("Mother's
Mercy") was the most simultaneously shared file in the history of the BitTorrent
filesharing protocol, with over 250,000 simultaneous sharers and over
1.5 million downloads in eight hours. For the sixth season, HBO did not send
screeners to the press to prevent the spread of unlicensed copies and possible
spoilers.

Observers, including series director David Petrarca and Time Warner CEO Jeff
Bewkes, said that illegal downloads did not hurt the series' prospects; it
benefited from "buzz" and social commentary, and the high piracy rate did not
significantly translate to lost subscriptions. According to Polygon, HBO's
relaxed attitude towards piracy and the sharing of login credentials amounted to
a premium-television "free-to-play" model. At a 2015 Oxford Union debate, series
co-creator David Benioff said that he was just glad that people watched the
show; illegally downloaded copies of the show sometimes interested viewers
enough to buy a copy of the show, especially in countries where the show was not
televised. Co-creator D. B. Weiss had mixed feelings, saying that the show was
expensive to produce and "if it doesn't make the money back, then it ceases to
exist". However, he was pleased that so many people "enjoy the show so much they
can't wait to get their hands on it." In 2015, Guinness World Records called
Game of Thrones the most-pirated television program.

Beginning on January 23, 2015, the last two episodes of season four were shown
in 205 IMAX theaters across the United States; Game of Thrones is the first TV
series shown in this format. The show earned $686,000 at the box office on its
opening day and $1.5 million during its opening weekend; the week-long release
grossed $1,896,092.

Game of Thrones was highly anticipated by fans before its premiere, and has
become a critical and commercial success. According to The Guardian, by 2014 it
was "the biggest drama" and "the most talked about show" on television.

Although Game of Thrones was dismissed by some critics before it began, its
success has been credited with an increase in the popularity of fantasy themes.
On the eve of the second season's premiere, a CNN.com blog post by Joel Williams
read, "After this weekend, you may be hard pressed to find someone who isn't a
fan of some form of epic fantasy" and cited Ian Bogost as saying that the series
continues a trend of successful screen adaptations beginning with Peter
Jackson's 2001 The Lord of the Rings film trilogy and the Harry Potter films
establishing fantasy as a mass-market genre; they are "gateway drugs to fantasy
fan culture". Its success in the face of its genre was attributed by writers to
a longing for escapism in popular culture, frequent female nudity and a skill in
balancing lighthearted and serious topics (dragons and politics, for example)
which provided it with a prestige enjoyed by conventional, top-tier drama
series.

The series' popularity increased sales of the A Song of Ice and Fire novels
(republished in tie-in editions), which remained at the top of bestseller lists
for months. According to The Daily Beast, Game of Thrones was a favorite of
sitcom writers and the series has been referred to in other TV series. With
other fantasy series, it has been cited for an increase in the purchase (and
abandonment) of huskies and other wolf-like dogs.

Game of Thrones has added to the popular vocabulary. The first season's frequent
scenes in which characters explain their motives (or background) while having
sex with prostitutes gave rise to the word "sexposition" for providing
exposition with sex and nudity. "Dothraki", the series' nomadic horsemen, was
ranked fourth in a September 2012 Global Language Monitor list of words from
television most used on the Internet. After the second season the media began
using "Game of Thrones" as a figure of speech or comparison for situations of
intense conflict and deceit, such as the court battle about U.S. healthcare
legislation, the Syrian Civil War and power struggles in the Chinese government.

"Khaleesi" has increased in popularity as a name for baby girls in the United
States. In the novels and the TV series, the word means "queen" in Dothraki and
is a title held by Daenerys Targaryen.

Game of Thrones has received critical acclaim, although the series' frequent use
of nudity and violence has been criticized. Its seasons have appeared on annual
"best of" lists published by the Washington Post (2011), TIME (2011 and 2012)
and The Hollywood Reporter (2012). Seasons two through five received a
Metacritic rating of 90 or higher: "universal acclaim", according to the
website. Its six seasons average a 94-percent "Fresh" rating on Rotten Tomatoes;
the first season was rated 90 percent, the second 96 percent, the third 97
percent, the fourth 96 percent, the fifth 95 percent and the sixth season 94
percent.

The performances of the cast have also been praised. Peter Dinklage's "charming,
morally ambiguous, and self-aware" Tyrion, who earned him Emmy and Golden Globe
awards, was noted. "In many ways, Game of Thrones belongs to Dinklage", wrote
Mary McNamara of the L.A. Times before Tyrion became the series' central figure
in season two. Several critics highlighted performances by actresses and
children. Fourteen-year-old Maisie Williams, noted in the first season for her
debut as Arya Stark, was singled out for her season-two work with veteran actor
Charles Dance (Tywin Lannister).

First-season reviewers said the series had high production values, a fully
realized world and compelling characters. According to Variety, "There may be no
show more profitable to its network than 'Game of Thrones' is to HBO. Fully
produced by the pay cabler and already a global phenomenon after only one
season, the fantasy skein was a gamble that has paid off handsomely".

The second season was also well received by critics. Entertainment Weekly
praised its "vivid, vital, and just plain fun" storytelling and, according to
the Hollywood Reporter, the show made a "strong case for being one of TV's best
series"; its seriousness made it the only drama comparable to Mad Men or
Breaking Bad. The New York Times gave the series a mixed review, criticizing its
number of characters, their lack of complexity and a meandering plot.

The third season was very well received by critics, with Metacritic giving it a
score of 91 out of 100 (indicating "universal acclaim"). It has a rating of 97
percent on Rotten Tomatoes, with an average score of 8.4 out of 10 based on 44
reviews. The fourth season was also praised; Metacritic gave it a score of 94
out of 100 based on 29 reviews, again indicating "universal acclaim". All
episodes had positive reviews of 91 percent or higher on Rotten Tomatoes, and a
97-percent rating (based on 50 reviews) for the season as a whole. The fifth
season was also well received by critics and has a score of 91 out of 100 (based
on 29 reviews) on Metacritic. On Rotten Tomatoes, it has a rating of 95 percent
and an average score of 8.6 out of 10 (based on 52 reviews). The sixth season,
based on the first episode, was praised by critics. It has a score of 73 out of
100 (based on nine reviews) on Metacritic, indicating "generally favorable
reviews". The season has a rating of 96 percent on Rotten Tomatoes, with an
average score of 8.4 out of 10 based on 29 reviews.

Despite its otherwise enthusiastic reception by critics, Game of Thrones has
been criticized for the amount of female nudity, violence, and sexual violence
(especially against women) it depicts, and for the manner in which it depicts
these themes. The Atlantic called the series' "tendency to ramp up the sex,
violence, and—especially—sexual violence" of the source material "the defining
weakness" of the adaptation. HBO's head of programming said in 2016 that "[the]
violence is not just specific to women, it's men and women. ... For example, men
are castrated. A guy is fed a cake made of his sons. ... the violence is spread
equally."

The amount of sex and nudity in the series, especially in scenes that are
incidental to the plot, was the focus of much of the criticism aimed at the
series in its first and second seasons. Stephen Dillane, who portrays Stannis
Baratheon, likened the series' frequent explicit scenes to "German porn from the
1970s". Charlie Anders wrote in io9 that while the first season was replete with
light-hearted "sexposition", the second season appeared to focus on distasteful,
exploitative, and dehumanizing sex with little informational content. According
to the Washington Post's Anna Holmes, the nude scenes appeared to be aimed
mainly at titillating heterosexual men, right down to the Brazilian waxes
sported by the women in the series' faux-medieval setting, which made these
scenes alienating to other viewers. The Huffington Post's Maureen Ryan likewise
noted that Game of Thrones mostly presented women naked, rather than men, and
that the excess of "random boobage" undercut any aspirations the series might
have to address the oppression of women in a feudal society. Saturday Night Live
parodied this aspect of the adaptation in a sketch that portrayed the series as
retaining a thirteen-year-old boy as a consultant whose main concern was showing
as many breasts as possible.

In the third season, which saw Theon Greyjoy lengthily tortured and eventually
emasculated, the series was also criticized for its use of torture. New York
magazine called the scene "torture porn." Madeleine Davies of Jezebel agreed,
saying, "it's not uncommon that Game of Thrones gets accused of being torture
porn — senseless, objectifying violence combined with senseless, objectifying
sexual imagery." According to Davies, although the series' violence tended to
serve a narrative purpose, Theon's torture in "The Bear and the Maiden Fair" was
excessive.

A scene in the fourth season's episode "Breaker of Chains", in which Jaime
Lannister rapes his sister and lover Cersei, triggered a broad public discussion
about the series' depiction of sexual violence against women. According to Dave
Itzkoff of the New York Times, the scene caused outrage, in part because of
comments by director Alex Graves that the scene became "consensual by the end".
Itzkoff also wrote that critics fear that "rape has become so pervasive in the
drama that it is almost background noise: a routine and unshocking occurrence".
Sonia Saraiya of The A.V. Club wrote that the series' choice to portray this
sexual act, and a similar one between Daenerys Targaryen and Khal Drogo in the
first season – both described as consensual in the source novels – as a rape
appeared to be an act of "exploitation for shock value". George R. R. Martin
responded that rape and sexual violence are common in war, and that omitting
them from the narrative would have undermined one of his novels' themes: that
"the true horrors of human history derive not from orcs and Dark Lords, but from
ourselves."

In the fifth season's episode "Unbowed, Unbent, Unbroken", Sansa Stark is raped
by Ramsay Bolton. Most reviewers, including those from Vanity Fair, Salon, The
Atlantic, and The Daily Beast, found the scene gratuitous and artistically
unnecessary. For example, Joanna Robinson, writing for Vanity Fair, said that
the scene "undercuts all the agency that's been growing in Sansa since the end
of last season." In contrast, Sara Stewart of The New York Post wondered why
viewers were not similarly upset about the many background and minor characters
who'd undergone similar or worse treatment. In response to the scene, pop
culture website The Mary Sue announced that it would cease coverage of the
series because of the repeated use of rape as a plot device. and U.S. senator
Claire McCaskill said that she would no longer watch it.

A Song of Ice and Fire and Game of Thrones have a broad, active international
fan base. In 2012 Vulture.com ranked the series' fans as the most devoted in
popular culture, more so than Lady Gaga's, Justin Bieber's, Harry Potter's or
Star Wars'. Fans include U.S. president Barack Obama, British prime minister
David Cameron, Australian prime minister Julia Gillard and Dutch foreign
minister Frans Timmermans, who framed European politics in quotes from Martin's
novels in a 2013 speech.

BBC News said in 2013 that "the passion and the extreme devotion of fans" had
created a phenomenon unlike anything related to other popular TV series,
manifesting itself in fan fiction, Game of Thrones-themed burlesque routines and
parents naming their children after series characters; writers quoted attributed
this success to the rich detail, moral ambiguity, sexual explicitness and epic
scale of the series and novels. The previous year, "Arya" was the fastest-rising
girl's name in the U.S. after it jumped in popularity from 711th to 413th place.

In 2013 about 58 percent of series viewers were male and 42 percent female, and
the average male viewer was 41 years old. According to SBS Broadcasting Group
marketing director Helen Kellie, Game of Thrones has a high fan-engagement rate;
5.5 percent of the series' 2.9 million Facebook fans talked online about the
series in 2012, compared to 1.8 percent of the more than ten million fans of
True Blood (HBO's other fantasy series). Vulture.com cited Westeros.org and
WinterIsComing.net (news and discussion forums), ToweroftheHand.com (which
organizes communal readings of the novels) and Podcastoficeandfire.com as fan
sites dedicated to the TV and novel series; and podcasts cover Game of Thrones.

Game of Thrones has won dozens of awards since it debuted as a series, including
38 Primetime Emmy Awards, 5 Screen Actors Guild Award, and a Peabody Award. It
holds the Emmy-award record for a scripted television series, ahead of Frasier
(which received 37). In 2013 the Writers Guild of America listed Game of Thrones
as the 40th "best written" series in television history. In 2015 The Hollywood
Reporter placed it at number four on their "best TV shows ever" list, while in
2016 the show was placed seventh on Empire's "The 50 best TV shows ever". The
same year Rolling Stone named it the twelfth "greatest TV Show of all time".

The 2011 first season received 13 nominations (including Outstanding Drama
Series), and won for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series (given to
Peter Dinklage for his portrayal of Tyrion Lannister) and Outstanding Main Title
Design. Other nominations included Outstanding Directing ("Winter Is Coming")
and Outstanding Writing ("Baelor"). Dinklage was also named Best Supporting
Actor at the Golden Globe, Satellite and Scream Awards.

In 2012, the second season received six Creative Arts Emmy Awards from 11
nominations, including Outstanding Drama Series and Outstanding Supporting Actor
in a Drama Series (Dinklage).

The 2013 third season received 16 Emmy nominations, including Outstanding Drama
Series, Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series (Dinklage), Outstanding
Supporting Actress in a Drama Series (Emilia Clarke), Outstanding Guest Actress
in a Drama Series (Diana Rigg) and Outstanding Writing ("The Rains of
Castamere"), winning two Creative Arts Emmys.

In 2014 the fourth season received four Creative Arts Emmys from 19 nominations,
which included Outstanding Drama Series, Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama
Series (Dinklage), Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series (Lena
Headey), Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series (Rigg), Outstanding
Directing ("The Watchers on the Wall") and Outstanding Writing ("The Children").

The 2015 fifth season won the most Primetime Emmy Awards for a series in a year
(12 awards from 24 nominations), including Outstanding Drama Series; other wins
included Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series (Dinklage), Outstanding
Directing ("Mother's Mercy") and Outstanding Writing ("Mother's Mercy"), and
eight were Creative Arts Emmy Awards.

In 2016, the sixth season received the most nominations for the 68th Primetime
Emmy Awards (23). It won for Outstanding Drama Series, Outstanding Directing
("Battle of the Bastards"), Outstanding Writing ("Battle of the Bastards"), and
nine Creative Arts Emmys. Nominations included Outstanding Supporting Actor in a
Drama Series (Dinklage and Kit Harington), Outstanding Supporting Actress in a
Drama Series (Clarke, Headey and Maisie Williams), Outstanding Guest Actor in a
Drama Series (Max von Sydow) and Outstanding Directing ("The Door").

The first season averaged 2.5 million viewers for its first Sunday-night
screenings and a gross audience (including repeats and on-demand viewings) of
9.3 million viewers per episode. For its second season, the series had an
average gross audience of 11.6 million viewers. The third season was seen by
14.2 million viewers, making Game of Thrones the second-most-viewed HBO series
(after The Sopranos). For the fourth season, HBO said that its average gross
audience of 18.4 million viewers (later adjusted to 18.6 million) had passed The
Sopranos for the record. By the sixth season the average per-episode gross
viewing figure had increased to over 25 million, with nearly 40 percent of
viewers watching on HBO digital platforms. In 2016, a New York Times study of
the 50 TV shows with the most Facebook Likes found that Game of Thrones was
"much more popular in cities than in the countryside, probably the only show
involving zombies that is".

The series set records on pay-television channels in the United Kingdom (with a
2016 average audience of more than five million on all platforms) and Australia
(with a cumulative average audience of 1.2 million).

The series has inspired four video games based on the TV series and novels. The
strategy game Game of Thrones Ascent ties into the HBO series, making characters
and settings available to players as they appear on television.

HBO has licensed a variety of merchandise based on Game of Thrones, including
games, replica weapons and armor, jewelry, bobblehead dolls by Funko, beer by
Ommegang and apparel. High-end merchandise includes a $10,500 Ulysse Nardin
wristwatch and a $30,000 resin replica of the Iron Throne. In 2013 and 2014, a
traveling exhibition of costumes, props, armor and weapons from the series
visited major cities in Europe and the Americas.

Thronecast: The Official Guide to Game of Thrones, a series of podcasts
presented by Geoff Lloyd and produced by Koink, has been released on the Sky
Atlantic website and the UK iTunes store during the series' run; a new podcast,
with analysis and cast interviews, is released after each episode. In 2014 and
2015 HBO commissioned Catch the Throne, two rap albums about the series.

A companion book, Inside HBO's Game of Thrones (ISBN 978-1-4521-1010-3) by
series writer Bryan Cogman, was published on September 27, 2012. The 192-page
book, illustrated with concept art and behind-the-scenes photographs, covers the
creation of the series' first two seasons and its principal characters and
families.

After the Thrones is a live aftershow in which hosts Andy Greenwald and Chris
Ryan discuss episodes of the series. It airs on HBO Now the Monday after each
sixth-season episode. The Game of Thrones Live Concert Experience, a 28-city
orchestral tour which will perform the series' soundtrack with composer Ramin
Djawadi, is scheduled to begin February 15, 2017 in Kansas City, Missouri.

In November 2016, HBO's President of Programming Casey Bloys indicated that he
had had preliminary discussions about a prequel spinoff to the Game of Thrones
series with George R.R. Martin. "There are areas we are exploring, but I
wouldn't point to any one and say, 'This is what we're going to do.'" HBO CEO
Richard Plepler commented in December 2016 that a spinoff "would be exciting"
but was somewhat non committal in that respect. "Right now we’re focused on
finishing the series ... We’re going to do that while at the same time parallel
processing very embryonic stages of other possibilities," he told The Hollywood
Reporter.

In January 2017, HBO's programming president Casey Bloys had this to say, "We'll
take some shots at it. I'm not going to do it just to do it. It has to feel very
special. I would rather have no sequel and leave it as-is then have something we
rushed out."

In March 2017, David Benioff and D. B. Weiss announced that they will not be
involved in any potential spinoff or prequel series. Saying, "I think HBO might
well do another series and I look forward to watching it and I think it be
great, but I think they should get new blood in".



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elie_Wiesel

Eliezer "Elie" Wiesel KBE (/ˈɛli viˈzɛl/, Yiddish: אליעזר ויזל‎, Elyezer Vizel;
September 30, 1928 – July 2, 2016) was a Romanian-born American Jewish writer,
professor, political activist, Nobel Laureate and Holocaust survivor. He was the
author of 57 books, written mostly in French and English, including Night, a
work based on his experiences as a prisoner in the Auschwitz and Buchenwald
concentration camps.

Along with writing, he was a professor of the humanities at Boston University,
which created the Elie Wiesel Center for Jewish Studies in his honor. He was
involved with Jewish causes, and helped establish the United States Holocaust
Memorial Museum in Washington, D.C. In his political activities he also
campaigned for victims of oppression in places like South Africa and Nicaragua
and genocide in Sudan. He publicly condemned the 1915 Armenian genocide and
remained a strong defender of human rights during his lifetime. He had been
described as "the most important Jew in America" by the Los Angeles Times.

Wiesel was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1986, at which time the Norwegian
Nobel Committee called him a "messenger to mankind," stating that through his
struggle to come to terms with "his own personal experience of total humiliation
and of the utter contempt for humanity shown in Hitler's death camps", as well
as his "practical work in the cause of peace", Wiesel had delivered a message
"of peace, atonement and human dignity" to humanity. He was a founding board
member of the New York Human Rights Foundation and remained active throughout
his life.

Elie Wiesel was born in Sighet (now Sighetu Marmației), Maramureș in the
Carpathian Mountains in Romania. His parents were Sarah Feig and Shlomo Wiesel.
At home, Wiesel's family spoke Yiddish most of the time, but also German,
Hungarian, and Romanian. Wiesel's mother, Sarah, was the daughter of Dodye Feig,
a celebrated Vizhnitz Hasid and farmer from a nearby village. Dodye was active
and trusted within the community.

Wiesel's father, Shlomo, instilled a strong sense of humanism in his son,
encouraging him to learn Hebrew and to read literature, whereas his mother
encouraged him to study the Torah. Wiesel has said his father represented reason
while his mother Sarah promoted faith. Wiesel was instructed that his genealogy
traced back to Rabbi Schlomo, son of Yitzhak, and was a descendant of Rabbi
Yeshayahu ben Abraham Horovitz ha-Levi, an author.

Wiesel had three siblings—older sisters Beatrice and Hilda, and younger sister,
Tzipora. Beatrice and Hilda survived the war and were reunited with Wiesel at a
French orphanage. They eventually emigrated to North America, with Beatrice
moving to Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Tzipora, Shlomo, and Sarah did not survive
the Holocaust.

In March 1944, Germany occupied Hungary which extended the Holocaust into that
country.[a] Wiesel was 15, and he with his family, along with the rest of the
town's Jewish population, were placed in one of the two confinement ghettos set
up in Máramarossziget (Sighet), the town where he had been born and raised. In
May 1944, the Hungarian authorities, under German pressure, began to deport the
Jewish community to the Auschwitz concentration camp, where up to 90 percent of
the people were exterminated on arrival.

After they were sent to Auschwitz, his mother and his younger sister were
murdered. Wiesel and his father were later deported to the concentration camp at
Buchenwald. Until that transfer, he admitted to Oprah Winfrey, his primary
motivation for trying to survive Auschwitz was knowing that his father was still
alive: "I knew that if I died, he would die." After they were taken to
Buchenwald, his father died before the camp was liberated. In Night, Wiesel
recalled the shame he felt when he heard his father being beaten and was unable
to help.

Wiesel was tattooed with inmate number "A-7713" on his left arm. The camp was
liberated by the U.S. Third Army on April 11, 1945, when they were just prepared
to be evacuated from Buchenwald.

After World War II ended and Wiesel was freed, he joined a transport of 1,000
child survivors of Buchenwald to Ecouis, France, where the Œuvre de secours aux
enfants (OSE) had set up a rehabilitation center. Wiesel subsequently joined a
smaller group of 90 to 100 boys from Orthodox homes who wanted kosher facilities
and a higher level of religious observance; they were cared for in a home in
Ambloy under the directorship of Judith Hemmendinger. This home was subsequently
moved to Taverny and operated until 1947.

Afterwards Wiesel traveled to Paris where he learned French and studied
literature, philosophy and psychology at the Sorbonne. He heard lectures by
philosopher Martin Buber and existentialist Jean-Paul Sartre and he spent his
evenings reading works by Fyodor Dostoyevsky, Franz Kafka, and Thomas Mann.

By the time he was 19, he had begun working as a journalist, writing in French,
while also teaching Hebrew and working as a choirmaster. He wrote for Israeli
and French newspapers, including Tsien in Kamf (in Yiddish).

In 1946, after learning of Irgun's bombing of the King David Hotel, Wiesel made
an unsuccessful attempt to join the underground movement. In 1948, he translated
articles from Hebrew to Yiddish for Irgun periodicals, but never became a member
of the organization. In 1949 he traveled to Israel as a correspondent for the
French newspaper L'arche. He then was hired as Paris correspondent for the
Israeli newspaper Yedioth Ahronoth, subsequently becoming its roaming
international correspondent.

For ten years after the war, Wiesel refused to write about or discuss his
experiences during the Holocaust. He began to reconsider after a meeting with
the French author François Mauriac, the 1952 Nobel Laureate in Literature who
eventually became Wiesel's close friend. Mauriac was a devout Christian who had
been with the French Resistance during the war. He compared Wiesel to "Lazarus
rising from the dead," and saw from Wiesel's tormented eyes, "the death of God
in the soul of a child." Mauriac persuaded him to begin writing about his
harrowing experiences.

Wiesel first wrote the 900-page memoir Un di velt hot geshvign (And the World
Remained Silent) in Yiddish, which was published in abridged form in Buenos
Aires. Wiesel rewrote a shortened version of the manuscript in French, La Nuit,
in 1955. It was translated into English as Night in 1960. The book sold few
copies after its publication, but still attracted interest from reviewers,
leading to television interviews with Wiesel and meetings with literary figures
such as Saul Bellow.

After its increased popularity, Night was eventually translated into 30
languages with ten million copies sold in the United States. Film director Orson
Welles at one point had wanted to make it into a feature film, but Wiesel
refused, feeling that his memoir would lose its meaning if it were told without
the silences in between his words. Oprah Winfrey made it a spotlight selection
for her book club in 2006.

In 1955, Wiesel moved to New York as foreign correspondent for the Israel daily,
Yediot Ahronot. In 1969, he married Marion Erster Rose, who was from Austria,
who also translated many of his books. They had one son, Shlomo Elisha Wiesel,
named after Wiesel’s father.

In the U.S., he went on to write over 40 books, most of them non-fiction
Holocaust literature, and novels. As an author, he has been awarded a number of
literary prizes and is considered among the most important in describing the
Holocaust from a highly personal level. As a result, some historians credited
Wiesel with giving the term "Holocaust" its present meaning, although he did not
feel that the word adequately described that historical event.

The 1979 book and play The Trial of God are said to have been based on his
real-life Auschwitz experience of witnessing three Jews who, close to death,
conduct a trial against God, under the accusation that He has been oppressive of
the Jewish people. Regarding his personal beliefs, Wiesel calls himself an
agnostic.

Wiesel also played a role in the initial success of The Painted Bird by Jerzy
Kosinski by endorsing it before revelations that the book was fiction and, in
the sense that it was presented as all Kosinski's true experience, a hoax.

Wiesel published two volumes of memoirs. The first, All Rivers Run to the Sea,
was published in 1994 and covered his life up to the year 1969. The second,
titled And the Sea is Never Full and published in 1999, covered the years from
1969 to 1999.

Wiesel and his wife, Marion, started the Elie Wiesel Foundation for Humanity in
1986. He served as chairman for the Presidential Commission on the Holocaust
(later renamed US Holocaust Memorial Council) from 1978 to 1986, spearheading
the building of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, D.C.

The museum gives The Elie Wiesel Award to "internationally prominent individuals
whose actions have advanced the Museum’s vision of a world where people confront
hatred, prevent genocide, and promote human dignity." The Foundation had
invested its endowment with money manager Bernard L. Madoff's investment Ponzi
scheme, costing the Foundation $15 million and Wiesel and his wife much of their
own personal savings.

He was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1986 for speaking out against violence,
repression, and racism. The Norwegian Nobel Committee described Wiesel as "one
of the most important spiritual leaders and guides in an age when violence,
repression and racism continue to characterize the world." Wiesel explained his
feelings during his acceptance speech:

He received many other prizes and honors for his work, including the
Congressional Gold Medal in 1985, the Presidential Medal of Freedom, and The
International Center in New York's Award of Excellence. He was also elected to
the American Academy of Arts and Letters in 1996.

Wiesel co-founded Moment Magazine with Leonard Fein in 1975. They founded the
magazine to provide a voice for American Jews. He was also a member of the
International Advisory Board of NGO Monitor.

Wiesel became a popular speaker on the subject of the Holocaust. As a political
activist, he also advocated for many causes, including Israel, the plight of
Soviet and Ethiopian Jews, the victims of apartheid in South Africa, Argentina's
Desaparecidos, Bosnian victims of genocide in the former Yugoslavia, Nicaragua's
Miskito Indians, and the Kurds.

In 2003 he discovered and publicized the fact that at least 280,000 Romanian and
Ukrainian Jews, along with other groups, were massacred in Romanian-run death
camps.

In early 2006 Wiesel accompanied Oprah Winfrey as she visited Auschwitz, a visit
which was broadcast as part of The Oprah Winfrey Show. On November 30, 2006,
Wiesel received an honorary knighthood in London in recognition of his work
toward raising Holocaust education in the United Kingdom.

In September 2006 he appeared before the UN Security Council with actor George
Clooney to call attention to the humanitarian crisis in Darfur. When Wiesel
died, Clooney wrote, "We had a champion who carried our pain, our guilt and our
responsibility on his shoulders for generations."

In 2007, Wiesel was awarded the Dayton Literary Peace Prize's Lifetime
Achievement Award. That same year, the Elie Wiesel Foundation for Humanity
issued a letter condemning Armenian genocide denial, a letter that was signed by
53 Nobel laureates including Wiesel. Wiesel has repeatedly called Turkey's
90-year-old campaign to downplay its actions during the Armenian genocide a
double killing.

In 2009, Wiesel criticized the Vatican for lifting the excommunication of
controversial bishop Richard Williamson, a member of the Society of Saint Pius
X.

In June 2009, Wiesel accompanied US President Barack Obama and German Chancellor
Angela Merkel as they toured Buchenwald. Wiesel was an adviser at the Gatestone
Institute. In 2010, Wiesel accepted a five-year appointment as a Distinguished
Presidential Fellow at Chapman University. In that role, he made a one-week
visit to Chapman annually to meet with students and offer his perspective on
subjects ranging from Holocaust history to religion, languages, literature, law
and music.

In July 2009, Wiesel announced his support to the minority Tamils in Sri Lanka.
He said that "Wherever minorities are being persecuted we must raise our voices
to protest...the Tamil people are being disenfranchised and victimized by
the Srilankan authorities. This injustice must stop. The Tamil people must be
allowed to live in peace and flourish in their homeland."

In 2009, Wiesel returned to Hungary for the first visit since the Holocaust.
During his visit, Wiesel participated in a conference at the Upper House Chamber
of the Hungarian Parliament, met Prime Minister Gordon Bajnai and President
László Sólyom, and made a speech to the approximately 10,000 participants of an
anti-racist gathering held in Faith Hall. However, in 2012, he protested against
"the whitewashing" of Hungary's involvement in the Holocaust, and he gave up the
Great Cross award he had received from the Hungarian government.

Wiesel was active in trying to prevent Iran from making nuclear weapons, stating
that "the words and actions of the leadership of Iran leave no doubt as to their
intentions." He also condemned Hamas for the "use of children as human shields"
during the 2014 Israel-Gaza Conflict. The Times refused to run the
advertisement, saying "the opinion being expressed is too strong and too
forcefully made and will cause concern amongst a significant number of Times
readers."

Wiesel often emphasized the Jewish connection to Jerusalem, and has criticized
the Obama administration for pressuring Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu to halt East Jerusalem Israeli settlement construction. He stated that
"Jerusalem is above politics. It is mentioned more than six hundred times in
Scripture—and not a single time in the Koran.... It belongs to the Jewish people
and is much more than a city..."

Wiesel was particularly fond of teaching and held the position of Andrew Mellon
Professor of the Humanities at Boston University since 1976, where he taught in
both its religion and philosophy departments. He became a close friend of the
president and chancellor John Silber. The university created the Elie Wiesel
Center for Jewish Studies in his honor. From 1972 to 1976 Wiesel was a
Distinguished Professor at the City University of New York and member of the
American Federation of Teachers.

In 1982 he served as the first Henry Luce Visiting Scholar in Humanities and
Social Thought at Yale University. He also co-instructed Winter Term (January)
courses at Eckerd College, St. Petersburg, Florida. From 1997 to 1999 he was
Ingeborg Rennert Visiting Professor of Judaic Studies at Barnard College of
Columbia University.

In 1969 he married Marion Erster Rose, who originally was from Austria and also
translated many of his books. They had one son, Shlomo Elisha Wiesel, named
after Wiesel’s father. The family lived in Greenwich, Connecticut.

Wiesel was attacked in a San Francisco hotel by 22-year-old Holocaust denier
Eric Hunt in February 2007, but was not injured. Hunt was arrested the following
month and charged with multiple offenses.

In February 2012, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints performed a
posthumous baptism of Simon Wiesenthal's parents. After Wiesel's name had been
submitted to be proxy baptized, he spoke out against the practice of
posthumously baptizing Jews and asked presidential candidate and Latter-day
Saint Mitt Romney to denounce it. Romney's campaign declined to comment,
directing such questions to church officials.

Utah senator Orrin Hatch paid tribute to Wiesel in a speech on the Senate floor
the following week, where he said that "With Elie's passing we have lost a
beacon of humanity and hope. We have lost a hero of human rights and a luminary
of Holocaust literature."



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/.rss

RSS (Rich Site Summary; originally RDF Site Summary; often called Really Simple
Syndication) uses a family of standard web feed formats to publish frequently
updated information: blog entries, news headlines, audio, video. An RSS document
(called "feed", "web feed", or "channel") includes full or summarized text, and
metadata, like publishing date and author's name.

RSS feeds enable publishers to syndicate data automatically. A standard XML file
format ensures compatibility with many different machines/programs. RSS feeds
also benefit users who want to receive timely updates from favourite websites or
to aggregate data from many sites.

Software termed "RSS reader", "aggregator", or "feed reader", which can be
web-based, desktop-based, or mobile-device-based, presents RSS feed data to
users. Users subscribe to feeds either by entering a feed's URI into the reader
or by clicking on the browser's feed icon. The RSS reader checks the user's
feeds regularly for new information and can automatically download it, if that
function is enabled. The reader also provides a user interface.

The RSS formats were preceded by several attempts at web syndication that did
not achieve widespread popularity. The basic idea of restructuring information
about websites goes back to as early as 1995, when Ramanathan V. Guha and others
in Apple Computer's Advanced Technology Group developed the Meta Content
Framework.

RDF Site Summary, the first version of RSS, was created by Dan Libby and
Ramanathan V. Guha at Netscape. It was released in March 1999 for use on the
My.Netscape.Com portal. This version became known as RSS 0.9. In July 1999, Dan
Libby of Netscape produced a new version, RSS 0.91, which simplified the format
by removing RDF elements and incorporating elements from Dave Winer's news
syndication format. Libby also renamed the format from RDF to RSS Rich Site
Summary and outlined further development of the format in a "futures document".

This would be Netscape's last participation in RSS development for eight years.
As RSS was being embraced by web publishers who wanted their feeds to be used on
My.Netscape.Com and other early RSS portals, Netscape dropped RSS support from
My.Netscape.Com in April 2001 during new owner AOL's restructuring of the
company, also removing documentation and tools that supported the format.

Two parties emerged to fill the void, with neither Netscape's help nor approval:
The RSS-DEV Working Group and Dave Winer, whose UserLand Software had published
some of the first publishing tools outside Netscape that could read and write
RSS.

Winer published a modified version of the RSS 0.91 specification on the UserLand
website, covering how it was being used in his company's products, and claimed
copyright to the document. A few months later, UserLand filed a U.S. trademark
registration for RSS, but failed to respond to a USPTO trademark examiner's
request and the request was rejected in December 2001.

The RSS-DEV Working Group, a project whose members included Guha and
representatives of O'Reilly Media and Moreover, produced RSS 1.0 in December
2000. This new version, which reclaimed the name RDF Site Summary from RSS 0.9,
reintroduced support for RDF and added XML namespaces support, adopting elements
from standard metadata vocabularies such as Dublin Core.

In December 2000, Winer released RSS 0.92 a minor set of changes aside from the
introduction of the enclosure element, which permitted audio files to be carried
in RSS feeds and helped spark podcasting. He also released drafts of RSS 0.93
and RSS 0.94 that were subsequently withdrawn.

In September 2002, Winer released a major new version of the format, RSS 2.0,
that redubbed its initials Really Simple Syndication. RSS 2.0 removed the type
attribute added in the RSS 0.94 draft and added support for namespaces. To
preserve backward compatibility with RSS 0.92, namespace support applies only to
other content included within an RSS 2.0 feed, not the RSS 2.0 elements
themselves. (Although other standards such as Atom attempt to correct this
limitation, RSS feeds are not aggregated with other content often enough to
shift the popularity from RSS to other formats having full namespace support.)

Because neither Winer nor the RSS-DEV Working Group had Netscape's involvement,
they could not make an official claim on the RSS name or format. This has fueled
ongoing controversy[specify] in the syndication development community as to
which entity was the proper publisher of RSS.

One product of that contentious debate was the creation of an alternative
syndication format, Atom, that began in June 2003. The Atom syndication format,
whose creation was in part motivated by a desire to get a clean start free of
the issues surrounding RSS, has been adopted as IETF Proposed Standard RFC 4287.

In July 2003, Winer and UserLand Software assigned the copyright of the RSS 2.0
specification to Harvard's Berkman Center for Internet & Society, where he had
just begun a term as a visiting fellow. At the same time, Winer launched the RSS
Advisory Board with Brent Simmons and Jon Udell, a group whose purpose was to
maintain and publish the specification and answer questions about the format.

In September 2004, Stephen Horlander created the now ubiquitous RSS icon () for
use in the Mozilla Firefox browser.

In December 2005, the Microsoft Internet Explorer team and Microsoft Outlook
team announced on their blogs that they were adopting Firefox's RSS icon. In
February 2006, Opera Software followed suit. This effectively made the orange
square with white radio waves the industry standard for RSS and Atom feeds,
replacing the large variety of icons and text that had been used previously to
identify syndication data.

In January 2006, Rogers Cadenhead relaunched the RSS Advisory Board without Dave
Winer's participation, with a stated desire to continue the development of the
RSS format and resolve ambiguities. In June 2007, the board revised their
version of the specification to confirm that namespaces may extend core elements
with namespace attributes, as Microsoft has done in Internet Explorer 7.
According to their view, a difference of interpretation left publishers unsure
of whether this was permitted or forbidden.

Later versions in each branch are backward-compatible with earlier versions
(aside from non-conformant RDF syntax in 0.90), and both versions include
properly documented extension mechanisms using XML Namespaces, either directly
(in the 2.* branch) or through RDF (in the 1.* branch). Most syndication
software supports both branches. "The Myth of RSS Compatibility", an article
written in 2004 by RSS critic and Atom advocate Mark Pilgrim, discusses RSS
version compatibility issues in more detail.

The extension mechanisms make it possible for each branch to copy innovations in
the other. For example, the RSS 2.* branch was the first to support enclosures,
making it the current leading choice for podcasting, and as of 2005[update] is
the format supported for that use by iTunes and other podcasting software;
however, an enclosure extension is now available for the RSS 1.* branch,
mod_enclosure. Likewise, the RSS 2.* core specification does not support
providing full-text in addition to a synopsis, but the RSS 1.* markup can be
(and often is) used as an extension. There are also several common outside
extension packages available, e.g. one from Microsoft for use in Internet
Explorer 7.

The most serious compatibility problem is with HTML markup. Userland's RSS
reader—generally considered as the reference implementation—did not originally
filter out HTML markup from feeds. As a result, publishers began placing HTML
markup into the titles and descriptions of items in their RSS feeds. This
behavior has become expected of readers, to the point of becoming a de facto
standard,[citation needed] though there is still some inconsistency in how
software handles this markup, particularly in titles. The RSS 2.0 specification
was later updated to include examples of entity-encoded HTML; however, all prior
plain text usages remain valid.

As of January 2007[update], tracking data from www.syndic8.com indicates that
the three main versions of RSS in current use are 0.91, 1.0, and 2.0,
constituting 13%, 17%, and 67% of worldwide RSS usage, respectively. These
figures, however, do not include usage of the rival web feed format Atom. As of
August 2008[update], the syndic8.com website is indexing 546,069 total feeds, of
which 86,496 (16%) were some dialect of Atom and 438,102 were some dialect of
RSS.

The primary objective of all RSS modules is to extend the basic XML schema
established for more robust syndication of content. This inherently allows for
more diverse, yet standardized, transactions without modifying the core RSS
specification.

To accomplish this extension, a tightly controlled vocabulary (in the RSS world,
"module"; in the XML world, "schema") is declared through an XML namespace to
give names to concepts and relationships between those concepts.

Although the number of items in an RSS channel is theoretically unlimited, some
news aggregators do not support RSS files larger than 150KB. For example,
applications that rely on the Common Feed List of Windows might handle such
files as if they were corrupt, and not open them. Interoperability can be
maximized by keeping the file size under this limit.

Some BitTorrent clients support RSS. RSS feeds which provide links to .torrent
files allow users to subscribe and automatically download content as soon as it
is published.

Some services deliver RSS to email inbox, sending updates from user's personal
selection and schedules. Conversely, some services deliver email to RSS readers.

Both RSS and Atom are widely supported and are compatible with all major
consumer feed readers. RSS gained wider use because of early feed reader
support. Technically, Atom has several advantages: less restrictive licensing,
IANA-registered MIME type, XML namespace, URI support, Relax NG support.

The following table shows RSS elements alongside Atom elements where they are
equivalent.

Note: the asterisk character (*) indicates that an element must be provided
(Atom elements "author" and "link" are only required under certain conditions).

Several major sites such as Facebook and Twitter previously offered RSS feeds
but have reduced or removed support. Additionally, widely used readers such as
Shiira, FeedDemon, and Google Reader have been discontinued having cited
declining popularity in RSS. RSS support was removed in OS X Mountain Lion's
versions of Mail and Safari, although the features were partially restored in
Safari 8. As of August 2015, Mozilla Firefox and Internet Explorer include RSS
support by default, while Google Chrome and Microsoft Edge do not. Additionally,
reader services such as Feedly provide synchronization between desktop RSS
readers and mobile devices.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Askari

An askari was a local soldier serving in the armies of the European colonial
powers in Africa, particularly in the African Great Lakes, Northeast Africa and
Central Africa. The word is used in this sense in English, as well as in German,
Italian, Urdu and Portuguese. In French, the word is used only in reference to
native troops outside the French colonial empire. The designation is still in
occasional use today to informally describe police, gendarmerie and security
guards.

Askari is a loan word from the Arabic عسكري (ʿaskarī), meaning "soldier". The
Arabic word is a derivation from عسكر (ʿaskar) meaning "army", which in turn is
from Persian لشکر (laškar). Words for "(a regular) soldier" derived from these
Arabic words are found in Amharic, Azeri, Persian, Somali, Swahili, Tajik,
Turkish and Urdu.

In the Belgian Congo, the askaris were organised into the Force Publique. This
combined military and police force was commanded by white Belgian officers and
non commissioned officers.

The Imperial British East Africa Company raised units of askaris from among the
Swahili people, the Sudanese and Somalis. There was no official uniform, nor
standardised weaponry. Many of the askaris campaigned in their native dress.
Officers usually wore civilian clothes.

From 1895 the British askaris were organised into a regular, disciplined and
uniformed force called the East African Rifles, later forming part of the
multi-battalion King's African Rifles. The designation of "askari" was retained
for locally recruited troops in the King's African Rifles, smaller military
units and police forces in the colonies until the end of British rule in Kenya,
Tanganyika and Uganda during the period 1961–63. Because of its colonial
connotations the term was generally discarded during the 1960s.

The German Colonial Army (Schutztruppe) of the German Empire employed native
troops with European officers and NCOs in its colonies. The main concentration
of such locally recruited troops was in German East Africa (now Tanzania),
formed in 1881 after the transfer of the Wissmanntruppe (raised in 1889 to
suppress the Abushiri Revolt) to German imperial control.

The first askaris formed in German East Africa were raised by DOAG (Deutsche
Ost-Afrika Gesellschaft—the German East Africa Company) in about 1888.
Originally drawn from Sudanese mercenaries, the German askaris were subsequently
recruited from the Wahehe and Angoni tribal groups. They were harshly
disciplined but well paid (on a scale twice that of their British counterparts
in the King's African Rifles), and highly trained by German cadres who were
themselves subject to a rigorous selection process. Prior to 1914 the basic
Schutztruppe unit in Southeast Africa was the feldkompanie comprising seven or
eight German officers and NCOs with between 150 and 200 askaris (usually
160)—including two machine gun teams.

Such small independent commands were often supplemented by tribal irregulars or
ruga-ruga.

They were successfully used in German East Africa where 11,000 askaris, porters
and their European officers, commanded by Paul Emil von Lettow-Vorbeck, managed
to resist numerically superior British, Portuguese and Belgian colonial forces
until the end of World War I in 1918.

The Weimar Republic provided pension payments to the German askaris. Due to
interruptions during the worldwide depression and World War II, the parliament
of the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany) voted in 1964 to fund the back
pay of the askaris still alive. The West German embassy at Dar es Salaam
identified approximately 350 ex-askaris and set up a temporary cashiers office
at Mwanza on Lake Victoria.

Only a few claimants could produce the certificates given to them in 1918;
others provided pieces of their old uniforms as proof of service. The banker who
had brought the money came up with an idea: as each claimant stepped forward he
was handed a broom and ordered in German to perform the manual of arms. Not one
of them failed the test.

During World War II, the Germans used the term "askaris" for Red Army,
predominantly Russian, deserters and POWs who formed units fighting against the
Red Army and in other action on the Eastern front.

Western Ukrainian volunteer units like the Nightingale Battalion, Schuma
battalions, and the 14th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS were also called
Askari. These battalions were used in many operations during World War II. Most
of them were either Red Army deserters or anti-communist peasants recruited from
Western Ukrainian rural areas under German occupation.

The Italian army in Italian East Africa recruited Eritrean and subsequently
Somali troops to serve with Italian officers and some NCOs. These forces
comprised infantry, cavalry, camel-mounted and light artillery units. Somali
personnel were later recruited to serve with Royal Italian Navy ships operating
in the Indian Ocean. The Italian askaris (ascari) fought in the Mahdist War,
Battle of Coatit, First Italo–Ethiopian War, Italian-Turkish War, Second
Italo-Abyssinian War and in the World War II East African Campaign.

Many of the Askaris in Eritrea were drawn from local Nilotic populations,
including Hamid Idris Awate, who reputedly had some Nara ancestry. Of these
troops, the first Eritrean battalions were raised in 1888 from Muslim and
Christian volunteers, replacing an earlier Basci-Buruk corps of irregulars. The
four Indigeni battalions in existence by 1891 were incorporated into the Royal
Corps of African Troops that year. Expanded to eight battalions, the Eritrean
ascaris fought with distinction at Serobeti, Agordat, Kassala, Coatit and Adwa
and subsequently served in Libya and Ethiopia.

Out of a total of 256,000 Italian troops serving in Italian East Africa in 1940,
about 182,000 were recruited from Eritrea, Somalia and the recently occupied
(1935–36) Ethiopia. When in January 1941, British Commonwealth forces invaded
Ethiopia in January 1941 most of the locally recruited ascaris deserted. The
majority of the Eritrean Ascaris remained loyal until the Italian surrender four
months later.

Initially the Eritrean Ascaris comprised only infantry battalions, although
Eritrean cavalry squadrons (Penne di Falco) and mountain artillery batteries
were subsequently raised. By 1922 units of camel cavalry called "meharisti" had
been added. Those Eritrean camel units were also deployed in Libya after 1932.
During the 1930s Benito Mussolini added some armored cars units to the Ascari.

Eritrean regiments in Italian service wore high red fezzes with coloured tufts
and waist sashes that varied according to each unit. As examples, the 17th
Eritrean Battalion had black and white tufts and vertically striped sashes;
while the 64th Eritrean Battalion wore both of these items in scarlet and
purple.

The Eritrean and Somali Ascari had the following ranks, from simple soldier to
senior non commissioned officer: Ascari - Muntaz (corporal) - Bulukbasci
(lance-sergeant) -Sciumbasci (sergeant). The Sciumbasci-capos (staff-sergeants)
were the senior Eritrean non-commissioned officers, chosen in part according to
their performance in battle. All commissioned officers of the Eritrean Ascari
were Italian.

As noted above "askari" was normally a designation used in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Exceptionally though, the term "askari" was also used by the Spanish colonial
government in North-West Africa, in respect not of their regular Moroccan troops
(see regulares), but of a locally recruited gendarmerie force raised in Spanish
Morocco in 1913. They were known as the "Mehal-la Jalifianas". This was the
equivalent of the better known Goumiers employed in French Morocco.

Indigenous members of the Tropas Nómadas or desert police serving in the Spanish
Sahara were also designated as "askaris", as were the other ranks of the Native
Police (Policia Indígena) raised in Melilla in 1909.

In Portuguese West Africa, and most other African colonies of the Portuguese
Empire, local askaris were recruited. These were used to keep the peace in the
nation-sized colonies. During the 20th century, all the indigenous troops were
merged into a Portuguese colonial army. This military was segregated along lines
of race, and until 1960 there were three classes of soldiers: commissioned
soldiers (European whites), overseas soldiers (black African "civilizados") and
native soldiers (Africans who lived in the Portuguese colonies). These
categories were renamed to 1st, 2nd and 3rd class in 1960—which effectively
corresponded to the same classification.

Widely deployed Ugandan private security guards are also designated as askari.
Guards were to receive $1,000 monthly salary and an $80,000 bonus if shot, but
many have complained that the money was not paid or unfair fees assessed. The
guards work for recruiting agencies such as Askar Security Services, which are
hired by Beowulf International, a receiving company in Iraq, which subcontracts
their services to EOD Technologies, an American company hired by the U.S.
Department of Defense to provide security guards for Camp Victory in Baghdad. A
Beowulf representative said that 400 of the workers "had impressed the US Army
with their skill and experience", but complained that some of the workers lacked
police or security experience and "didn't even know how to hold a gun". At least
eleven other Ugandan recruiters include Dresak International and Connect
Financial Services.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caroline_Aherne

Caroline Mary Aherne (24 December 1963 – 2 July 2016) was an English comedian
and BAFTA-winning writer and actress, best known for performing as the acerbic
chat show host Mrs Merton, various roles in the The Fast Show, and as the lead
role in the The Royle Family, which she co-wrote. She was also known for
narrating the Channel 4 reality television series Gogglebox, a role she held
from its inception in 2013 until she became too ill in April 2016.

Aherne was born in Ealing, London, to the family of an Irish railway worker, and
from the age of two was brought up in Wythenshawe, Manchester. Like her brother,
Patrick, Aherne suffered from retinoblastoma in childhood, which left her
partially sighted in one eye. She attended the Hollies Convent Grammar School in
West Didsbury and then studied drama at Liverpool Polytechnic.

Aherne began performing on the Manchester comedy circuit as characters such as
Mitzi Goldberg, lead singer of the comedy country and western act the Mitzi
Goldberg Experience and Sister Mary Immaculate, an Irish nun. She developed her
Mrs Merton character with Frank Sidebottom for his show on Piccadilly Radio,
where she worked as a receptionist. Aherne's first TV appearances were as Mrs
Merton in a semi-regular spot on the Granada TV discussion show "Upfront" in
1990. She made brief appearances in The Smell of Reeves and Mortimer in 1993 and
alongside Steve Coogan and John Thomson in a Granada TV pilot entitled The Dead
Good Shows.

She rose to prominence in 1994 as her created character Mrs Merton on the mock
chat show The Mrs Merton Show under her married name of Caroline Hook. The
guests were real-life celebrities, not actors, who found themselves the subject
of outrageous faux naïve questions – in one memorable example the wife of
magician Paul Daniels, Debbie McGee, was asked "So, what first attracted you to
the millionaire Paul Daniels?"

Another episode featured comedian Bernard Manning and actor Richard Wilson.
Manning clashed with Wilson and Aherne, although he acknowledged that One Foot
in the Grave was funny. The series ran in various formats from 1994 to 1997,
winning a BAFTA for Best Chat Show in 1997. The success of the show was partly
attributed to the "round vowel sounds of the North West accent" which "naturally
sound safe and unthreatening" and which allowed the character "to ask the most
outrageous, below-the-belt questions of her guest stars".

The Mrs Merton character was given a sitcom, Mrs Merton and Malcolm, which
depicted her home life with her "mummy's boy" son (played by co-writer Craig
Cash). This aspect of Malcolm's character was exaggerated to the point that many
complained the series ridiculed those with learning difficulties. Mrs Merton and
Malcolm lasted one series, and was released on DVD in 2008.

Between 1994 and 1997 she appeared in and wrote for the BBC comedy series The
Fast Show. One of her most notable characters was the "Chanel 9 Neus"
meteorologist Poula Fisch, who invariably reported a temperature for all
locations of 45 °C (113 °F) while exclaiming "Scorchio!" with apparent surprise.
Other notable characters included the endlessly chattering northern Renée, wife
of submissive husband Roy and supermarket Checkout Girl who, by way of
conversation, would comment on each item a customer had bought.

Her most popular creation is the situation comedy The Royle Family, which she
co-created and wrote with Cash, and directed in its third series. The programme
ran for three series from 1998 to 2000. Aherne starred alongside Ricky Tomlinson
and Sue Johnston, as their daughter Denise Royle. The show was a commercial and
critical success, and ran for three series of six episodes as well as three
one-offs. After a 2000 spoof documentary with Cash entitled Back Passage to
India, Aherne said The Royle Family would end in December 2000 after a Christmas
special, and that she would not appear on television again, although she would
continue to write. Aherne received BAFTAs for Best Sitcom in 2000 and 2007, and
she won the BAFTA for Best Comedy Performance in 2000. She was nominated for
directing in 2001.

Following a disagreement with Cash, Aherne moved to Australia, retreating from
the press. She wrote Dossa and Joe which was screened on BBC 2 in 2002. Although
critics applauded it, the show did not attract viewers and did not return for a
second series. Returning to Britain, she began work on another sitcom with Cash
but pulled out, after which Cash wrote Early Doors with Phil Mealey.

After Dossa and Joe, Aherne avoided media attention. When The Fast Show was
featured on the BBC One show Comedy Connections, Aherne was the only cast member
not interviewed. In April 2006, the BBC said Aherne and Cash were developing a
script for a one-off special of The Royle Family. The Royle Family: The Queen of
Sheba was broadcast on 29 October 2006, to an audience of 7.8 million. Aherne
subsequently made few TV appearances. On 14 October 2008 she was in the BBC
comedy drama written by Cash and Phil Mealey, Sunshine as a barmaid. She
appeared in The Royle Family, The New Sofa on Christmas Day 2008. In 2009, she
appeared in a Royle Family special for Comic Relief as well as another Christmas
Day special of The Royle Family entitled The Golden Eggcup. She co-wrote the ITV
comedy-drama The Fattest Man in Britain, which was broadcast in December 2009.

In November 2010, Aherne appeared in the special The Royle Family: Behind the
Sofa shown on Gold, featuring clips of The Royle Family and interviews with
Aherne, Cash and the cast, which was followed by another Christmas Day special,
Joe's Cracker. She narrated a BBC1 documentary series Pound Shop Wars broadcast
in November 2012. She also appeared in The Fast Show internet specials,
sponsored by the lager brand Fosters, which reunited most of the original
principal cast; only Mark Williams was unable to participate.

Aherne wrote the 2013 one-off sitcom The Security Men along with Jeff Pope for
ITV. The episode starred Paddy McGuinness, Brendan O'Carroll, Dean Andrews,
Bobby Ball and Peter Wight.

Aherne's final role was as narrator of the Channel 4 comedy reality series
Gogglebox, reflecting her character in The Royle Family, who would frequently be
watching TV and commenting on it. Cash filled in when she was unavailable and
took over the role permanently in April 2016.

Aherne's final on screen appearance came in the Sky 1 show After Hours, where
she was reunited with her old writing partner Craig Cash who produced and
directed the show. She played the role of Sheila.

Aherne was married to Peter Hook of the bands Joy Division and New Order from
1994 until 1997. During their marriage he appeared in her TV series The Mrs
Merton Show as leader of Hooky & the Boys, the show's house band. In his
autobiography, published some months after Aherne's death, Hook wrote that she
had physically abused him at points during their marriage.

Her private life was well publicised, especially her depressions and struggles
with both alcohol and drugs during the 1990s. Before The Royle Family began, she
suffered from depression and, when her former boyfriend, BBC technician Matt
Bowers, succumbed to stomach cancer, it was the catalyst for her problems to
manifest in a failed suicide attempt. The day after she checked into the Priory
clinic and was diagnosed as a binge alcoholic. It was after these events that
she began The Royle Family. She suffered from bladder cancer and from a rare
cancer of the retina. In 2014 she embarked on a programme of treatment for lung
cancer.

In June 2014 Aherne appeared in Manchester at the launch of the Macmillan Cancer
Improvement Partnership (MCIP), a £3.4m scheme to co-ordinate cancer care in the
city. She spoke about how a sense of humour had helped her cope with the
disease. In 2016, Aherne became the voice behind the UK government's "One You"
health campaign, to persuade people to cut down on cigarettes and alcohol.

On 2 July 2016, Aherne died at her home in Timperley at the age of 52 on her own
after a dramatic deterioration due to her illness. Aherne had told family and
close friends in May that she was terminally ill. She died alone but it was said
that ten days before she was laughing and joking with Carmel Morgan who says
that she said that she achieved everything that she wanted and was happy. Her
private funeral took place on 14 July 2016 in Trafford.[citation needed]

In October 2016, she was paid tribute to by Steve Coogan at the Stand Up to
Cancer 2016 event, who spoke about her before a video was played of her TV
moments and then Noel Gallagher's High Flying Birds performed The Royle Family
theme tune "Half the World Away".



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Final_Fantasy_video_games

Final Fantasy is a video game series developed and published by Square Enix
(formerly Square). The first title in the series, the eponymous Final Fantasy,
premiered in Japan in 1987, and Final Fantasy games have been released almost
every single year since. Fifteen games have been released as part of the main
(numbered) series. Sequels, prequels, spin-offs, and related video games have
been published, as well as numerous titles in other media forms. Each game in
the main series takes place in a different fictional universe rather than serve
as direct sequels to prior games, although some titles have received sequels, or
prequels, set in the same universe.

Most of the games have been re-released for several different platforms, many of
which have been included in collection and compilation releases. The series as a
whole is primarily composed of role-playing video games, but also includes
massively multiplayer online role-playing games, third-person shooters, tower
defense games, and tactical role-playing games. Final Fantasy games have been
released on over a dozen video game consoles beginning with the Nintendo
Entertainment System, as well as for personal computers and mobile phones. The
series is Square Enix's most successful franchise, having sold over 100 million
units worldwide as of June 2011, across both the main series and its spin-offs.
Final Fantasy's popularity has placed it as one of the best-selling video game
franchises.

Collections are groups of games or system-specific releases of games that are
branded or marketed together. Unlike compilations, they were made available as
individual products.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Legend_of_Tarzan_(film)

The Legend of Tarzan is a 2016 American action adventure film based on the
fictional character created by Edgar Rice Burroughs. Directed by David Yates and
written by Adam Cozad and Craig Brewer, the film stars Alexander Skarsgård as
the title character, with Samuel L. Jackson, Margot Robbie, Djimon Hounsou, Jim
Broadbent, and Christoph Waltz in supporting roles. Principal photography began
on June 21, 2014, at Warner Bros. Leavesden Studios in the United Kingdom, and
wrapped four months later on October 3.

The film premiered at the Dolby Theatre in Los Angeles on June 29, 2016 and was
theatrically released in the United States on July 1, 2016, in 2D, 3D, IMAX and
IMAX 3D. The film grossed over $356 million against a budget of $180 million and
received mixed reviews from critics.

As a result of the Berlin Conference, the Congo Basin is claimed by King Leopold
II of the Belgians, who rules the Congo Free State in personal union with the
Kingdom of Belgium. The country is on the verge of bankruptcy, Leopold having
borrowed huge amounts of money to finance the construction of railways and other
infrastructure projects. In response, he sends his envoy Léon Rom (Christoph
Waltz) to secure the fabled diamonds of Opar. Rom's expedition is ambushed and
massacred, with only Rom surviving. A tribal leader, Chief Mbonga (Djimon
Hounsou), offers him the diamonds in exchange for an old enemy: Tarzan.

The man once called "Tarzan", John Clayton III, the fifth Earl of Greystoke
(Alexander Skarsgård), has long since left Africa behind and settled down in
London with his American-born wife, Jane Porter (Margot Robbie), taking up his
birth name and ancestral family residence as Lord Greystoke. In the eight years
since returning from Africa, John's story as Tarzan has become legendary among
the Victorian public, although John himself wishes to leave the past behind him.
Through the British Prime Minister (Jim Broadbent), John is invited by King
Leopold to visit Boma and report on the development of the Congo by Belgium,
though Greystoke politely declines the invitation. An American envoy, George
Washington Williams (Samuel L. Jackson), who recognises John from the stories of
"Tarzan", privately reveals his suspicions that the Belgians are enslaving the
Congolese population. Williams persuades John to accept the invitation in order
to prove his suspicions. Jane is disappointed when John says that she should not
come, as he thinks the trip would be too dangerous, remembering how both his
parents died as a result of the jungle's brutality following their shipwreck
there — his mother of disease and his father later killed by the Mangani apes —
leaving the baby John to be raised as Tarzan by his Mangani "mother" Kala and
"brother" Akut. However, Jane reminds him that she grew up in Africa as well,
and misses her home and friends there. John relents, and allows Jane to
accompany him.

John, Jane, and Williams take the trip to the Congo. There, the trio encounters
a tribal village and villagers who knew John and Jane during their stay in the
jungle. Jane explains to Williams that her husband was once considered an evil
spirit by the African tribes, including that of Chief Mbonga. She recalls how,
when she was younger, she and her father lived in the tribal village helping to
care for local children. There she met Tarzan (made feral and physically
enhanced by his life with the apes) who saved Jane's life by shielding her from
a vicious mangani attack, suffering severe injuries in the process. Jane took
the injured Tarzan home, nursed him back to health, and the two fell in love.
That night, as the tribe sleeps, Rom and his mercenaries raid the village and
kidnap John and Jane and kill the tribe's leader. They then escape to a nearby
steamboat with Jane and several of the tribe's members, but Williams is able to
rescue John before he can be taken to the boat.

With the aid of the tribe's warriors, John and Williams intercept a Belgian
military train carrying captured slaves, providing Williams with the evidence he
needs to expose King Leopold. They also discover that Rom intends to use the
diamonds to pay for a massive army to subdue the Congo, and allow Belgium to
mine its wealth for Leopold's benefit. As John and Williams continue onward,
John encounters the adult Akut, who is now leader of the apes. Aware that Akut
considers him a deserter, John prepares to fight Akut, though he soon loses.
That night, as John recovers, Williams recalls the massacres of Native Americans
during the Indian Wars, comparing to those of Rom and Leopold.

On Rom's steamboat, Jane dines with Rom, before escaping and swimming to shore.
Jane stumbles into a group of mangani apes, where she is rescued by Rom, whose
men then shoot and kill many of the apes. John saves the remaining group,
reconciling with Akut, before pursuing Rom. He is cornered by Mbonga and his
tribe, where it is revealed that John once killed Mbonga's only son for
previously killing Kala. A defeated Mbonga tearfully accuses John of lacking
honor, as his son was just a young boy when John killed him. John spares Mbonga,
just as Akut and the manganis arrive to subdue the tribe. Rom takes Jane and the
diamonds to Boma, where he plans to take control of the army. John, Williams and
Akut trigger a massive stampede of wildebeest through Boma, destroying the town
and distracting the soldiers, allowing John to rescue Jane. As Rom attempts to
escape by boat, Williams sinks it with a machine gun as John swims aboard. Rom
incapacitates John by strangling him and then tying him by the neck to the
ship's railing, before trying to escape again. John then summons crocodiles with
a mating call to devour Rom, before escaping the destroyed vessel himself.

Williams returns to England and presents the Prime Minister with evidence
exposing the slave trade in the African Congo. One year later, John and Jane,
having remained in Africa and settled in Jane's father's old house, welcome
their first child, as John, Lord Greystoke, returns to his rightful place among
the great apes as Tarzan.

John Hurt was originally going to be part of the cast, but was cut from the
movie.

An updated version of Tarzan had been in the works since at least 2003, with
John August writing. However, by 2008, it was reported that a different version,
co-written by Stephen Sommers and Stuart Beatle, that was said to resemble the
Pirates of the Caribbean series, was in development. By 2011, Craig Brewer, who
also rewrote a version of the script, was set to direct the film, although this
did not come to pass. Instead, David Yates was chosen to direct in 2012. Other
directors in the running included Susanna White and Gary Ross. In April 2013, it
was reported that the production was temporarily suspended due to budgetary
concerns.

For a while, producer Jerry Weintraub (no relation to the 50s and 60s Tarzan
producer Sy Weintraub) wanted swimmer Michael Phelps to play the title role,
feeling that he was the heir apparent to Johnny Weissmuller, the actor who had
famously played Tarzan, and who was also a prominent competitive swimmer.
Weintraub changed his mind after watching Phelps host Saturday Night Live,
reportedly deciding against the decision after watching the episode for only two
minutes. Other early contenders for the role included Henry Cavill, Tom Hardy,
and Charlie Hunnam. On November 14, 2012, Alexander Skarsgård was cast in the
title role, the choice of director Yates, while Samuel L. Jackson was being eyed
to play Williams in the film. Yates found Skarsgård to be the perfect Tarzan. He
liked that he was born in Sweden but had found a career in America, so "he has
this wonderful quality of not quite belonging to one or the other", he said. On
March 6, 2013, it was reported that Yates wanted Jessica Chastain to play the
female lead role, Jane Porter. On September 26, 2013, Christoph Waltz was in
talks to play the villain in the film; he was later cast, as Captain Rom.

The studio eyed Margot Robbie and Emma Stone to play the female lead character,
Jane Porter. Emma Watson (who worked with Yates on the last four Harry Potter
films), Sarah Bolger, Georgina Haig, Lucy Hale, Lyndsy Fonseca, Eleanor
Tomlinson, Gabriella Wilde, Lucy Boynton and Cressida Bonas were all considered
for the part. On January 18, 2014, Robbie was confirmed to play the female lead,
Jane, in the film, opposite Skarsgård, beating Stone for the role. On June 4,
Djimon Hounsou was set to play Chief Mbonga in the film. On June 17, Osy Ikhile
was added to the cast to play a supporting role, but the character was not then
named. Ella Purnell was later cast as young Jane Porter, and Casper Crump was
cast to play Captain Kerchover. The release of the first trailer in December
2015 revealed that Jim Broadbent was also part of the cast.

Principal photography on the film commenced on June 30, 2014, at Warner Bros.
Studios in Leavesden, Hertfordshire, UK. Filming had begun on the day an
announcement was made for the expansion of the studio. Filming wrapped the same
year on October 3. Making Africa seem authentic was especially important to the
filmmakers, since the film was shot in England, except for six weeks in Gabon,
filming background without the cast. A working waterfall and a 100-foot-long
collapsible pier were assembled at Warner Bros.’ Leavesden studios. According to
The Wall Street Journal, shooting the film in Africa would have made the budget
even higher. Filming took place for a total of 70 days.

The film's score was composed by Rupert Gregson-Williams. The soundtrack was
released on June 16, 2016 by WaterTower Music and on CD on 24 June 2016. Hozier
provided a single, Better Love, which was played at the film's end credits.

The film was released on July 1, 2016 by Warner Bros., in traditional formats as
well as 3D and IMAX 3D.

The film was released in October 11, 2016, in traditional formats, as Blu-ray,
DVD and 4K Blu-ray.

The Legend of Tarzan was unable to generate any profits financially. It grossed
$126.6 million in North America and $230.1 million in other territories, for a
worldwide total of $356.7 million. Variety deemed, given its $180 million
budget, that in order for the film to break even and justify a sequel, it would
have to earn at least $400 million overall at the box office.

In the United States and Canada, The Legend of Tarzan opened alongside The BFG
and The Purge: Election Year, and was projected to gross to $25–33 million in
its opening weekend. It opened Friday, July 1, 2016 across 3,561 theaters and
6,700 screens, and grossed $14 million on its opening day, including $1.4
million in IMAX showings. This includes $2.6 million it made from Thursday night
previews. In its opening weekend, buoyed by positive word of mouth, the film
grossed a better-than-expected $38.5 million, of which IMAX contributed $3.9
million, and $45.6 million over its four-day Independence Day holiday frame,
finishing second place at the box office behind Finding Dory, but first among
new releases. However, despite its opening numbers, Deadline.com called the film
a "dud", due to its lofty budget.

Internationally, The Legend of Tarzan received a scattered release pattern, in
order to take advantage of the competitive landscape surrounding the 2016
European Championship. It is likely that a recoup of the film's hefty production
budget will be dependent on international audiences and returns. Jeff Goldstein,
Warner's executive vice president of domestic distribution, told The New York
Times, "This property has always really been about the international
opportunity." The film opened across 19 markets on the same weekend it debuted
in North America, including major territories like Russia and South Korea. In
its opening weekend, it grossed $19.3 million on about 6,700 screens, and an
IMAX total of $1.2 million from 122 IMAX theaters. In Russia and the CIS, it
opened with $3.1 million, debuting in first place at the box office. However, it
was the lowest No. 1 opening for a film since April, while in South Korea it
debuted at No. 2, with $4 million. In the latter market, it faced significant
competition from local films Familyhood and The Hunt, both of which performed
strongly. In the United Kingdom and Ireland, it came in second place with $4.7
million, including previews, debuting behind the animated The Secret Life of
Pets, and in Australia with $3.2 million, behind Finding Dory. Elsewhere, Asia
had No. 1 openings in India, Indonesia, Thailand and Malaysia. The studio also
reported No. 1 debuts in Mexico ($4.6 million), Brazil ($3.4 million), Spain
($1.8 million), Italy ($1.6 million), the majority of Eastern European markets,
and Puerto Rico. Germany ($2 million), the UAE ($1.6 million), and Japan ($1.5
million) had similar opening figures.

In China – the film's second biggest market – the film was granted a rare
release date in the month of July, a peculiar move since July is typically the
month when Chinese regulators ban foreign films (including Hollywood films) in
order to protect and promote their own local films. It opened on Tuesday, July
19, and made $7 million on its opening day. It went on to deliver a six-day
opening of around $27 million and a three-day weekend opening of $12 million.
Although the opening number was regarded strong, it came in second place, behind
Skiptrace, which occupied a market share in excess of 56%, in comparion to The
Legend of Tarzan's 16%.

In terms of total earnings, its biggest markets outside of the United States are
China ($45.1 million), Mexico ($13.7 million) and the U.K. and Ireland ($11.9
million).

On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 36% based on 210 reviews
with an average rating of 5.1/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "The
Legend of Tarzan has more on its mind than many movies starring the classic
character, but that isn't enough to make up for its generic plot or sluggish
pace." On Metacritic, the film has a score of 44 out of 100 based on 41 critics,
indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the
film an average grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale.

Manohla Dargis of The New York Times gave the film a positive review, stating
"What makes it more enjoyable than a lot of recycled stories of this type is
that the filmmakers have given Tarzan a thoughtful, imperfect makeover." In his
review, Peter Travers of Rolling Stone stated "At least it's watchable. In
summer, baby, that's high praise."

Peter Debruge of Variety gave the film a negative review, stating "A talky and
mostly turgid attempt by British director David Yates to build on the epic
vision he brought to the final four Harry Potter movies via another beloved
literary hero." Jordan Hoffman of The Guardian criticized the film for its story
and writing, stating "Committed performances aren’t enough to save this film
from uncomfortable colonial optics, uninspiring CGI and tedious plotlines."

IMDb named The Legend of Tarzan as one of its Top 10 Movies of 2016, as in being
among the "most consistently popular with IMDb users this past year," by noting:



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Game_of_Thrones_(season_6)

The sixth season of the fantasy drama television series Game of Thrones
premiered on HBO on April 24, 2016, and concluded on June 26, 2016. It consists
of ten episodes, each of approximately 50–60 minutes, largely of original
content not found in George R. R. Martin's A Song of Ice and Fire series. Some
material is adapted from the upcoming sixth novel The Winds of Winter and the
fourth and fifth novels, A Feast for Crows and A Dance with Dragons. The series
was adapted for television by David Benioff and D. B. Weiss. HBO ordered the
season on April 8, 2014, together with the fifth season, which began filming in
July 2015 primarily in Northern Ireland, Spain, Croatia, Iceland and Canada.
Each episode cost over $10 million.

The season follows the continuing struggle between the Starks and other noble
families of Westeros for the Iron Throne. The Starks defeat the Bolton forces in
battle, and Jon Snow is proclaimed the King in the North. Tyrion attempts to
rule Meereen while Daenerys is held captive by a Dothraki tribe. At King's
Landing, the Tyrell army attempts to liberate Margaery and Loras, but Margaery
capitulates to the High Sparrow, who becomes more powerful by influencing King
Tommen. At her trial, Cersei burns the Great Sept, killing her rivals, while
Tommen kills himself. Unopposed, Cersei is crowned Queen of Westeros. Ellaria
Sand and three of Oberyn Martell's daughters kill Doran and Trystane Martell and
seize control of Dorne, and Olenna discusses an alliance with Ellaria. In Essos,
Daenerys Targaryen is captured by Khal Moro who takes her before the khals; she
burns them alive and takes command of the Dothraki.

Game of Thrones features a large ensemble cast, including Peter Dinklage,
Nikolaj Coster-Waldau, Lena Headey, Emilia Clarke and Kit Harington. The season
introduced new cast members, including Max von Sydow, Pilou Asbæk and James
Faulkner.

Critics praised its production values, writing, plot development, and cast. Game
of Thrones received most nominations for the 68th Primetime Emmy Awards, with 23
nominations, and won twelve, including that for Outstanding Drama Series for the
second year in a row. U.S. viewership rose compared to the previous season, and
by approximately 13% over its course, from 7.9 million to 8.9 million by the
finale.

Following their escape from Winterfell, Sansa Stark journeys to the Wall, while
Theon Greyjoy returns to the Iron Islands. In Winterfell, Ramsay Bolton secures
his claim on the North by killing Roose and Walda Bolton and his new-born
half-brother. At the Wall, Melisandre resurrects Jon Snow, who is reunited with
Sansa; they gather loyalists and a battle ensues. Aided by the Knights of the
Vale, the Starks defeat the Bolton forces. Sansa feeds Ramsay to his hounds and
Jon is proclaimed the King in the North.

At King's Landing, Jaime Lannister and the Tyrell army attempt to liberate
Margaery and Loras, but Margaery capitulates to the High Sparrow and Tommen
forges an alliance with the Faith. During Loras and Cersei's trial, Cersei uses
wildfire to burn the Great Sept, killing the High Sparrow, Margarey, Loras,
Mace, Kevan, and Lancel, while Tommen kills himself after witnessing the events.
Unopposed, Cersei is crowned Queen of Westeros. Ellaria Sand and three of Oberyn
Martell's daughters kill Doran and Trystane Martell and seize control of Dorne,
and Olenna meets with Ellaria, at a summit brokered by Varys, to discuss allying
with the Targaryens.

In Braavos, Arya continues her training with the Faceless Men, and soon regains
her eyesight. When she refuses to accomplish a mission, the Waif is ordered to
kill Arya, who kills her instead. Arya reasserts her identity as a Stark and
returns to Westeros.

In the Riverlands, the Hound pursues the Brotherhood Without Banners for
massacring the people who saved him. He finds Lord Beric Dondarrion executing
his quarry, and is asked to join the Brotherhood traveling north. Jaime
Lannister besieges Riverrun and takes the castle, killing the Blackfish after
forcing Edmure Tully to order a surrender. Walder Frey celebrates the victory
before being killed by Arya.

Beyond the Wall, Bran Stark trains with the Three-Eyed Raven but alerts the
Night King, who launches an attack of White Walkers. Bran and Meera escape and
are rescued by Benjen Stark. Bran subsequently has a vision to the Tower of Joy
years prior, revealing that Jon is not Ned Stark's bastard but rather the child
of Lyanna Stark and Rhaegar Targaryen.

Sam Tarly, Gilly, and Little Sam travel to the Citadel at Oldtown, stopping to
visit Sam's family.

In Essos, Daenerys Targaryen is captured by Khal Moro who takes her before the
khals; she burns them alive and takes command of the Dothraki. Tyrion Lannister
brings a short-lived peace to Meereen, which is reinforced when Daenerys returns
and flies her dragons into battle against the slavers. Yara and Theon arrive and
pledge allegiance to Daenerys after Euron Greyjoy kills their father and usurps
leadership of the Iron Islands. Jorah Mormont departs to find a cure for
greyscale and Daario is left in command of Meereen, while Daenerys sails for
Westeros.

The writing staff for the sixth season includes executive producers and
showrunners David Benioff and D. B. Weiss, producer Bryan Cogman and Dave Hill.
Author George R. R. Martin, who had written one episode for each of the first
four seasons, did not write an episode for the sixth season, as he was working
to finish writing the sixth A Song of Ice and Fire novel, The Winds of Winter.
The directing staff for the sixth season was Jeremy Podeswa (episodes 1 and 2),
Daniel Sackheim (episodes 3 and 4), Jack Bender (episodes 5 and 6), Mark Mylod
(episodes 7 and 8), and Miguel Sapochnik (episodes 9 and 10). Sackheim and
Bender were first-time Game of Thrones directors, with the rest each having
directed two episodes in the previous season.

With the end of the fifth season, the content of the show has reached the plot
of the latest novel in Martin's A Song of Ice and Fire series, A Dance with
Dragons. Season 6 director Jeremy Podeswa said in August 2015: "Right now in
season six, what we're shooting currently isn't based on anything in the book.
It's fully based on discussions the writers have had with George Martin, because
the series has now surpassed the books in terms of what's available." Actress
Natalie Dormer, who plays Margaery Tyrell, later added that the show's writers
"know where it’s got to go and what [George Martin]’s intentions for the
characters are. But they are just filling in the gaps."

The season premiere starts off right where the fifth season ended. A plot from
The Winds of Winter regarding a traveling theater troupe located in Braavos that
stages a play called "The Bloody Hand", about the events that have taken place
in King's Landing since the beginning of the series, is included in the sixth
season.

Filming for season six began in July 2015, and ended on December 17, 2015. The
budget for the sixth season increased compared to the previous seasons as each
episode did cost over $10 million per episode, totaling over $100 million for
the full season and setting a new high for the series. The season filmed in five
different countries, Northern Ireland, Spain, Croatia, Iceland and Canada.

Like the previous seasons, a large amount of production took place in Northern
Ireland, mainly in Belfast and on the Causeway Coast, including film locations
in the Binevenagh, Magilligan area which was used to film scenes for the
Dothraki Grasslands, and Larrybane Quarry and Ballintoy Harbour, both used for
scenes in the Iron Islands. The small village of Corbet was also used, for the
siege of Riverrun. As in previous seasons, some of Castle Black was set at the
abandoned Magheramorne quarry.

From September 3 to October 23, 2015 the show also filmed in Spain, specifically
in Girona, Navarre, Peniscola, and Almería. Some filming locations in Spain
included the Castle of Zafra in Guadalajara, the Bardenas Reales Natural Park in
Navarre, the Alcazaba in Almería, and the Castle of Santa Florentina in Canet de
Mar.

In August 2015, HBO announced that for the first time since season 1, the show
would not be filming any scenes in Croatia. The Croatian city of Dubrovnik has
stood in for King's Landing since the beginning of season 2; nearby cities such
as Klis, Split and Šibenik have been used to depict various other locations.
Contradicting the statement by HBO, cast of the show were seen in costume in
Dubrovnik in October 2015.

Only a very small portion of the season was filmed in Canada (north of Calgary,
Alberta): the scenes featuring Jon Snow's wolf Ghost (played by animal actor
Quigly). However, some of the special effects were created at Montreal's Rodeo
FX studios which has won Emmy Awards previously for its work on the series.

The sixth season saw the return of Isaac Hempstead Wright as Bran Stark,
Kristian Nairn as Hodor, Ellie Kendrick as Meera Reed, Gemma Whelan as Yara
Greyjoy, and Rory McCann as Sandor "The Hound" Clegane, who did not appear in
the fifth season. Clive Russell, Tobias Menzies, Patrick Malahide, Richard
Dormer and Paul Kaye also returned to the show as Brynden Tully, Edmure Tully,
Balon Greyjoy, Beric Dondarrion and Thoros of Myr after not appearing since the
third season. Jonathan Pryce as the High Sparrow was added to the series main
cast after appearing in a recurring role in the previous season.

Across the Narrow Sea, Melanie Liburd plays a Red priestess from Asshai who is
in R'hllor's service. At the Reach, House Tarly is introduced, with Freddie
Stroma joining the cast as Samwell Tarly's brother Dickon Tarly, a character who
was mentioned in the novels but has yet to appear in them. Other members of
House Tarly that were introduced were Randyll Tarly, played by James Faulkner;
Melessa Tarly, played by Samantha Spiro and Talla Tarly, who was portrayed by
Rebecca Benson.

Veteran actor Max von Sydow was cast to play the Three-Eyed-Raven, who is
training Bran. The character was previously played by Struan Rodger in the
fourth season finale "The Children". David Bradley confirmed in August 2015,
that he would be returning to the show as Walder Frey after last appearing in
the third season finale "Mhysa", but he did not confirm when he would be
returning. After the second official trailer was released, it was confirmed that
Bradley would appear in the sixth season. Danish actor Pilou Asbæk joins the
show as Theon Greyjoy's uncle, pirate captain Euron Greyjoy. Members of the
Icelandic band Of Monsters and Men made cameo appearances. Ricky Champ played
Gatins, an outlaw who is a part of a band using religion to justify extorting
the people of the countryside. A young Ned Stark was portrayed by Sebastian
Croft in a flashback scene.

The sixth season also included a traveling theater troupe located in Braavos
that stages a play called "The Bloody Hand", about the events that have taken
place in King's Landing since the beginning of the series. Essie Davis and Kevin
Eldon joined the cast in this theater troupe, portraying actors playing Cersei
Lannister and Ned Stark, respectively, while Richard E. Grant was cast as the
troupe's manager. Members of Icelandic indie band Of Monsters and Men appear as
the musicians of the Braavos theatre group.

After the fifth season finale "Mother's Mercy", the fates of several key
characters, such as Sansa Stark, Theon Greyjoy, Stannis Baratheon, Myrcella
Baratheon and Jon Snow were left unknown. It was later confirmed at the 2015 San
Diego Comic-Con that Sophie Turner and Alfie Allen would return for the sixth
season, implying that their characters Sansa and Theon/Reek survived the jump
from the castle walls of Winterfell. The director of "Mother's Mercy", David
Nutter, said later in an interview that Stannis' death was intended by the
episode's script. Showrunners David Benioff and D.B. Weiss also confirmed that
Myrcella died after being poisoned by Ellaria Sand.

Although Weiss had stated that Jon Snow is indeed dead, photos of Kit Harington,
the actor playing Jon Snow, arriving in Belfast surfaced in July 2015. Since the
season 6 script read-throughs were being held in Belfast, these photos fueled
speculation that his character might not be dead after all. However, Joanna
Robinson of Vanity Fair pointed out that Charles Dance was seen at Belfast the
previous year, and his character Tywin Lannister only appeared in the first
episode of the subsequent season and only as a corpse, although Dance himself
confirmed the nature of his role shortly after the announcement. Another photo,
showing Harington on set in Belfast in a costume that varied from the Night's
Watch outfit, was published on September 25, 2015. There has been considerable
fan speculation regarding how Jon might have survived, including spiritually
possessing his direwolf's body and being brought back to life by Melisandre. In
February 2016, actor Nikolaj Coster-Waldau revealed that the opening scene of
the sixth season will "kind of reveal that Jon Snow is ...dead." In March 2016,
Harington confirmed in an interview that he did in fact film new scenes for the
sixth season as a corpse, and that he knows for how long his character is to
remain that way.

On November 23, 2015, a teaser poster displaying Jon Snow was released on the
official Game of Thrones Twitter account. A 41-second teaser trailer was
released on December 3, featuring Jon Snow from the fifth season episode
"Hardhome", as well as many of the previous seasons' highlights, and a
voice-over from Max von Sydow as the Three-Eyed Raven and Isaac Hempstead Wright
as Bran Stark. The first footage from the season was revealed in a new
promotional video released by HBO highlighting its new and returning original
shows for the coming year on December 6, 2015, showcasing scenes involving
Daenerys Targaryen, Ramsay Bolton, Cersei Lannister, and Tommen Baratheon. On
December 28, 2015, Entertainment Weekly released its "Exclusive First Look"
issue, featuring an image of Bran Stark, who was noticeably older from his last
appearance in season four, and with shorter hair.

On January 22, 2016, three teaser trailers were released, with each teaser
depicting the banners of the houses Targaryen, Lannister and Stark, and included
voice-overs by Iwan Rheon as Ramsay Bolton, Jonathan Pryce as The High Sparrow
and an unknown character speaking in Dothraki. On February 11, 2016, HBO
released 28 exclusive photos from the sixth season, picturing several of the
main characters during the season and confirming the fates of Theon, Sansa and
Myrcella, while Jon Snow was notably absent. HBO released a teaser trailer on
February 14, 2016, that shows the faces of a number of living as well as
deceased characters such as Ned Stark, Robb Stark, Catelyn Stark, Joffrey
Baratheon, Tywin Lannister, Stannis Baratheon, Ygritte and, controversially, Jon
Snow in the House of Black and White. On February 24, 2016, HBO released 16
character posters of both deceased and alive characters, and two official
posters featuring various characters.

A behind-the-scenes video of the sixth season was released on February 29, 2016,
focusing on camera operators working on the show. The first official trailer for
season 6 was released on March 8, 2016. Another behind-the-scenes video was
released on March 22, 2016, focusing on the creative process of prosthetics,
specifically the White Walkers. The video also contained new footage of White
Walkers from the sixth season. On March 24, Entertainment Weekly revealed a
series of new issues titled "Dame of Thrones", featuring six of the female lead
characters from the series and focus on the sixth season. On March 26, 2016, new
photos from season six, in addition to a new promo named "March Madness" with
new footage, was released by HBO. After the screening of the season premiere
"The Red Woman", HBO released a second official trailer. As well, in July 2016,
HBO released a "blooper reel" online, a video of outtakes from season 6.

The soundtrack for the season was released digitally on June 24, 2016, and will
be on CD on July 29, 2016. The album reached No. 27 on Billboard 200, No. 1 on
Soundtrack chart, and No. 79 on the Canadian Albums chart on its digital
release, with the track from the season finale "Light of the Seven" reaching No.
1 on Billboard's Spotify Viral 50 chart.

After the Thrones, a live aftershow in which hosts Andy Greenwald and Chris Ryan
discuss episodes of the series, airs on the stand-alone streaming service HBO
Now on the Monday following each episode of the show's sixth season.

The season received highly positive reviews, with special praise directed at the
episodes "The Door", "Battle of the Bastards" and "The Winds of Winter". On
Metacritic, the season (based on the first episode) has a score of 73 out of 100
based on 9 reviews, indicating "generally favorable reviews". On Rotten
Tomatoes, the sixth season has a 96 percent approval rating from 29 critics with
an average rating of 8.4 out of 10. The season also received a 95% episode
average score on Rotten Tomatoes.

The season finale had 8.89 million viewers on its initial airing on HBO, up 10%
from previous season's finale, which was the most-watched episode prior to this
episode. The average gross viewing figure per episode for the show, which
include streaming, DVR recordings and repeat showings, reached over 25 million
this season, and it was described as the last consensus show on television. The
figure went up by 25% compared to previous year, and viewing figures of the show
this season on its on demand services HBO Now and HBO Go went up by over 90%,
which were new records for HBO. Almost 40% of viewers of the show watched this
season on HBO digital platforms. The show also broke records on pay television
channels in 2016 in the United Kingdom with an average audience of more than 5
million across all platforms, and in Australia with a cumulative average
audience of 1.2 million viewers.

^1 Live +7 ratings were not available, so Live +3 ratings have been used
instead.

For the 32nd TCA Awards, the series was nominated for Program of the Year and
Outstanding Achievement in Drama. For the 68th Primetime Emmy Awards, the series
received 23 nominations, the most of any series. It won 12 awards, including
Outstanding Drama Series, David Benioff and D. B. Weiss for Outstanding Writing
for a Drama Series for "Battle of the Bastards", and Miguel Sapochnik for
Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series for "Battle of the Bastards". For the
7th Critics' Choice Television Awards, the series won for Best Drama Series.

The season was simulcast around the world by HBO and its broadcast partners.
While in some countries, it aired the day after its first release.

The season was released on Blu-ray and DVD on November 15, 2016. The set
includes extra background, behind-the-scenes material and deleted scenes.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kevin_Durant

Kevin Wayne Durant (born September 29, 1988) is an American professional
basketball player for the Golden State Warriors of the National Basketball
Association (NBA). Durant has won an NBA Most Valuable Player Award, four NBA
scoring titles, the NBA Rookie of the Year Award, and two Olympic gold medals.
He has also been selected to six All-NBA teams and eight All-Star teams.

Durant was a heavily recruited high school prospect. He played one season of
college basketball for the University of Texas, where he won numerous year-end
awards and became the first freshman to be named Naismith College Player of the
Year. In the 2007 NBA draft, he was selected with the second overall pick by the
Seattle SuperSonics. After his rookie season, the team relocated to Oklahoma
City and became the Thunder. Durant helped lead Oklahoma City to the 2012 NBA
Finals, losing to the Miami Heat in five games. He played nine seasons for the
Thunder organization before joining the Warriors in 2016.

Durant was born on September 29, 1988 in Washington, D.C. to Wanda (née Durant)
and Wayne Pratt. When Durant was an infant, his father deserted the family;
Wanda and Wayne eventually divorced, and Durant's grandmother Barbara Davis
helped raise him. By age 13, his father re-entered his life and traveled the
country with him to basketball tournaments. Durant has one sister, Brianna, and
two brothers, Tony and Rayvonne. Growing up, Durant wanted to play for his
favorite team, the Toronto Raptors, which included his favorite player, Vince
Carter. He played Amateur Athletic Union (AAU) basketball for several teams in
the Maryland area and was teammates with future National Basketball Association
(NBA) players Michael Beasley, Greivis Vásquez, and Ty Lawson, the former of
whom Durant remains friends with to this day. During this time, he began wearing
#35 as his jersey number in honor of his AAU coach, Charles Craig, who was
murdered at the age of 35.

After playing two years of high school basketball at National Christian Academy
and one year at Oak Hill Academy, Durant transferred to Montrose Christian
School for his senior year, growing five inches before the start of the season
and beginning the year with a height of 6 feet, 7 inches. Prior to the start of
the season, he committed to the University of Texas. At the conclusion of the
year, he was named the Washington Post All-Met Basketball Player of the Year, as
well as the Most Valuable Player of the 2006 McDonald's All-American Game. He
was widely regarded as the second-best high school prospect of 2006.

For the 2006–07 college season, Durant averaged 25.8 points, 11.1 rebounds, and
1.3 assists per game. The Longhorns finished the year with a 25–10 record
overall and a 12–4 record in conference. Awarded a fourth seed in the NCAA
Tournament, Texas won their first round match-up against New Mexico State but
were upset in the second round by USC despite a 30-point and 9-rebound
performance from Durant. For his outstanding play, Durant was recognized as the
unanimous national player of the year, winning the John R. Wooden Award, the
Naismith College Player of the Year Award, and all eight other widely recognized
honors and awards. Durant was the first freshman ever to win any of the National
Player of the Year awards. On April 11, he officially declared for the 2007 NBA
draft. His jersey was later retired by the Longhorns.

Durant was selected with the second overall pick in the 2007 NBA draft by the
Seattle SuperSonics. In his first career game, he registered 18 points, 5
rebounds, and 3 steals against the Denver Nuggets. On November 16, he made the
first game-winning shot of his career in a game against the Atlanta Hawks. At
the conclusion of the season, he was named the NBA Rookie of the Year behind
averages of 20.3 points, 4.4 rebounds, and 2.4 assists per game. He joined
Carmelo Anthony and LeBron James as the only teenagers in league history to
average at least 20 points per game over an entire season.

Following Durant's debut season, the SuperSonics relocated from Seattle to
Oklahoma City, becoming the Thunder and switching to new colors blue, orange,
and yellow. The team also drafted UCLA guard Russell Westbrook, who would form
an All-Star combination with Durant in later years. At the 2009 NBA All-Star
Weekend, Durant set a Rookie Challenge record with 46 points. By the conclusion
of the year, he had raised his scoring average by five points from the prior
season to 25.3 points per game, and was considered a strong candidate for the
Most Improved Player Award, eventually finishing third in the voting.

During the 2009–10 season, Durant was selected to his first NBA All-Star Game.
Behind his play, the Thunder improved their record by 27 wins from the previous
year and defied expectations to make the playoffs. With a scoring average of
30.1 points per game, he became the youngest NBA scoring champion and was
selected to his first All-NBA team. In his playoff debut, he scored 24 points in
a Game 1 loss against the Los Angeles Lakers. Oklahoma City would go on to lose
the series in six games, but the team's performance led sports analysts to label
them as an upcoming title contender.

Prior to the start of the 2010–11 season, Durant announced via Twitter that he
had signed a five-year contract extension with the Thunder worth approximately
$86 million. For the second consecutive year, he led the NBA in scoring,
averaging 27.7 points a game. Behind his leadership, the Thunder won 55 games
and earned the fourth seed in the Western Conference. In the playoffs, Oklahoma
City defeated the Denver Nuggets and Memphis Grizzlies en route to a Conference
Finals match-up versus the Dallas Mavericks, losing in five games.

On February 19 of the lockout-shortened 2011–12 season, Durant recorded his
first career 50 point game, scoring 51 points against the Denver Nuggets. At the
All-Star Game, he scored 36 points and was awarded his first NBA All-Star Game
Most Valuable Player Award. He finished the year with a scoring average of 28
points per game, representing his third straight scoring title. Behind his play,
the Thunder won 47 games and entered the playoffs as the Western Conference's
second seed. In Game 1 of the first round against the Mavericks, Durant hit a
game-winner with 1.5 seconds remaining. Oklahoma City would go on to defeat
Dallas, the Lakers, and the San Antonio Spurs before losing to the Miami Heat in
the Finals. For the championship round, Durant led all players with 30.6 points
per game, doing so on a 54.8 shooting rate.

With a scoring average of 28.1 points per game to finish the 2012–13 season,
Durant failed to defend his scoring title; however, with a 51 percent shooting
rate, a 41.6 percent three point shooting rate, and a 90.5 free throw shooting
rate, he became the youngest player in NBA history to join the 50–40–90 club.
Finishing the year with a 60–22 record, Oklahoma City earned the first seed in
the Western Conference. In the first round of the playoffs against the Houston
Rockets, Russell Westbrook tore his meniscus, forcing him to miss the remainder
of the postseason. Without Westbrook, Durant was given more responsibility,
averaging a career-high 30.8 points per game throughout the playoffs, but
Oklahoma City were eventually eliminated in the second round by the Memphis
Grizzlies.

In January of the 2013–14 season, Durant averaged 35.9 points per game while
scoring 30 or more points in 12 straight games, including a career-high 54
points against the Golden State Warriors. In April, he surpassed Michael
Jordan's record for consecutive games scoring 25 points or more at 41. The
Thunder finished the year with 59 wins and Durant was voted the NBA Most
Valuable Player behind averages of 32 points, 7.4 rebounds, and 5.5 assists per
game. To begin the first round of the playoffs, he struggled against the
physical play of the Grizzlies, converting on only 24 percent of his field goals
in Game 4. Through six games, the Thunder trailed the series 3–2, prompting The
Oklahoman to dub Durant "Mr. Unreliable". He responded by scoring 36 points in a
Game 6 victory. Oklahoma City eventually eliminated Memphis and the Los Angeles
Clippers before losing to the Spurs in the Conference Finals.

Prior to the start of the 2014–15 season, Durant was diagnosed with a Jones
fracture in his right foot and was ruled out for six to eight weeks. He
subsequently missed the first 17 games of the year, making his season debut for
the Thunder on December 2 against the New Orleans Pelicans. On December 18, he
injured his ankle against the Golden State Warriors, returning to action on
December 31 against the Phoenix Suns to score a season-high 44 points. He then
sprained his left big toe in late January. On February 22, he was sidelined
again after undergoing a minor procedure to help reduce pain and discomfort in
his surgically repaired right foot, and on March 27, he was officially ruled out
for the rest of the season after deciding to undergo foot surgery. In just 27
games, he averaged 25.4 points, 6.6 rebounds, and 4.1 assists per game.

To begin the 2015–16 season, Durant and teammate Russell Westbrook reached
several historical milestones together, including becoming the first pair of
teammates to each score at least 40 points in a single game since 1996, doing so
in a win over the Orlando Magic on October 30. On January 26, Durant scored a
season-high 44 points in an overtime victory against the New York Knicks. On
April 11, he scored 34 points against the Lakers, setting an NBA record for
consecutive games scoring 20 or more points with 64. For the year, Durant
averaged 28.2 points, 8.2 rebounds, 5 assists, and 1.2 blocks per game, leading
the Thunder to 55 wins and the third seed in the West. In Game 2 of the first
round of the playoffs against the Mavericks, he scored 21 points but made just
7-of-33 shots in the worst postseason shooting performance, both by percentage
and number of misses, of his career. After defeating Dallas, Oklahoma City moved
on to face the Spurs in the second round, falling behind 2–1 to start the
series. In Game 4, Durant tied his playoff career high with 41 points in a
Thunder win. Oklahoma City eventually defeated the Spurs in six games, drawing a
matchup with the record-setting 73-win Golden State Warriors in the Conference
Finals. Despite going up 3–1, the Thunder were ousted in seven games, with
Durant providing 27 points in the elimination game.

On July 4, 2016, Durant announced his intentions to sign with the Golden State
Warriors. The move was received negatively by the public and NBA analysts, with
many comparing the move to LeBron James's 2010 off-season departure from the
Cleveland Cavaliers to join the Miami Heat. On July 7, he officially signed with
the Warriors on a two-year, $54.3 million contract with a player option after
the first year.

On October 25, Durant made his debut for the Warriors in their season opener
against the San Antonio Spurs. In 36 minutes of action, he recorded a team-high
27 points and 10 rebounds in a 129–100 loss. Three days later, he recorded 30
points and 17 rebounds (one shy of his career high) in a 122–114 win over the
New Orleans Pelicans. In his third game for Golden State on October 30, he had a
37-point outing in a 106–100 win over the Phoenix Suns. On November 3, he
matched his career high with seven three-pointers and scored 39 points in a
122–96 win over his former team, the Thunder. With 22 points against the
Pelicans on November 7, Durant had at least 20 points for his 71st straight
game, matching Kareem Abdul-Jabbar for the fifth-longest streak in NBA history.
He increased that streak to 72 games with at least 20 points on November 9
against the Mavericks, tying Michael Jordan for the fourth-longest streak ever.
The streak ended the following day when he scored 18 points in a win against the
Denver Nuggets. On November 26, he recorded 28 points, 10 rebounds, five assists
and a career-high six blocked shots in a 115–102 win over the Minnesota
Timberwolves. It was the Warriors' first time ever having someone finish with at
least 25 points, 10 rebounds, five assists and five blocks. Two days later, he
was named Western Conference Player of the Week for games played Monday,
November 21 through Sunday, November 27. Durant helped Golden State to a 4–0
week behind averages of 24.8 points, 8.3 rebounds, 6.3 assists and 2.75 blocked
shots per game. On December 1, he matched his season high with 39 points to go
with 13 rebounds, three steals and three blocks in a 132–127 double overtime
loss to the Houston Rockets. On December 28, he had 22 points, matched his
season best with 17 rebounds, and added seven assists and five blocks in a
121–111 win over the Toronto Raptors. Two days later, he recorded his eighth
career triple-double (his first since joining the Warriors) with 19 points, 11
rebounds and 10 assists in a 108–99 win over the Mavericks. On January 18, 2017,
he set a new season high with 40 points in a 121–100 win over the Thunder. On
February 2, 2017, he was named Co-Western Conference Player of the Month for
January alongside teammate Stephen Curry. On February 11, in his first game back
in Oklahoma City, Durant scored 34 points while being booed throughout the
night, as he helped the Warriors defeat the Thunder for the third time in
2016–17 with a 130–114 win. The Thunder crowd jeered him loudly during pregame
warmups, starter introductions and whenever he touched the ball. On March 1, he
was ruled out indefinitely after suffering a Grade 2 MCL sprain and a tibial
bone bruise the previous night against the Washington Wizards.

In February 2007, Durant received an invitation to the United States national
team training camp. Despite a strong performance, he was cut from the team when
its roster was trimmed to its twelve-player limit. Coach Mike Krzyzewski cited
the experience of the remaining players as the deciding factor in making the
cut. Durant was finally selected to the national team at the 2010 FIBA World
Championship and became their leader as other All-Stars were unavailable, a role
he downplayed. At the tournament, he led Team USA to its first FIBA World
Championship since 1994, earning MVP honors in the process. His final averages
for the competition were 22.8 points, 6.1 rebounds, 3.1 assists, and 1.4 steals
per game in nine games.

At the 2012 Olympics, Durant set the record for total points scored in an
Olympic basketball tournament. With averages of 19.5 points, 5.8 rebounds, 2.6
assists, and 1.6 steals per game, he helped the national team go undefeated en
route to a gold medal. In the tournament's final game, he led all scorers with
30 points.

Less than a month before the start of the 2014 FIBA Basketball World Cup, Durant
announced that he would be dropping out of the competition, citing mental and
physical exhaustion as reasons for his departure. He rejoined Team USA in 2016
for the Olympics, where he led them to a Gold medal. In recognition of his
performances, Durant was named the 2016 co-USA Basketball Male Athlete of the
Year, along with Carmelo Anthony, for the second time in his career.

Though Durant's height is officially listed as 6 ft 9 in (2.06 m), Durant has
stated that he actually stands 6 ft 10 3⁄4 in (2.10 m) barefoot and 7 ft 0 in
(2.13 m) with shoes. He plays mostly at the small forward position. His career
averages are 27.4 points, 7 rebounds, and 3.7 assists per game. He has earned
All-NBA honors six times (2009–14, 2016) and was voted Rookie of the Year in his
debut season. He has won an MVP Award and finished second in the voting three
times, a trend he has expressed frustration over.

Described as a "scoring prodigy" by John Hollinger, Durant regularly finishes as
one of the NBA's points leaders and has won the scoring title four times. A
strong outside shooter, he is one of only seven members of the 50–40–90 club,
and his 2013 campaign was called "one of the greatest shooting seasons in league
history" by Grantland's Zach Lowe. One of the biggest reasons for Durant's
shooting prowess is his seven-foot, four inch wingspan, which helps him get his
shot off cleanly over most defenders. He is also a strong finisher at the rim,
converting on 72.2 percent of shots in the paint in 2012. Early in his career,
he was criticized for his slim build, defense, and passing. Over time, he grew
as a playmaker, increasing his assist numbers every year from 2010 to 2014. He
also showed defensive improvement, with opponents averaging just .62 points per
isolation play against him in 2014, the best success rate for defensive players
who faced at least 100 isolations that season.

Durant describes himself as a "high school kid" and enjoys playing video games
in his spare time. He is very close with his mother, Wanda, a relationship that
was detailed in the Lifetime movie The Real MVP: The Wanda Pratt Story. A
Christian, Durant goes to chapel before every game and has religious tattoos on
his stomach, wrist, and back. He owns several properties in the Oklahoma City
area and listed his primary residence, located in the affluent Club Villa
neighborhood, for sale for $1.95 million in 2013. That same year, he opened a
restaurant, KD's Southern Cuisine, in the Bricktown neighborhood and became
engaged to Monica Wright, a WNBA player. In 2016, he was a credentialed
photographer for the The Players' Tribune at Super Bowl 50.

Durant was formerly represented by agents Aaron Goodwin and Rob Pelinka. He left
Pelinka in 2013 and signed with the Roc Nation group, headed by Jay-Z. Durant
has endorsement deals with Nike, Sprint, Gatorade, Panini, General Electric, and
2K Sports. In 2012, he tried his hand at acting, appearing in the children's
film Thunderstruck. In 2013, he earned $35 million, making him the
fourth-highest-earning basketball player that year. In an interview with Sports
Illustrated, Durant claimed that, despite his high earnings potential, "global
marketing and all that stuff" does not interest him.

One of the most popular players in the league, Durant's jersey regularly ranks
as one of the NBA's best-selling and he is consistently one of the top All-Star
vote-getters. He has developed a reputation for his kind demeanor; in 2013, Foot
Locker released a series of commercials calling him the "nicest guy in the NBA",
and he has become a beloved figure in Oklahoma City, known for his "nice
escapades" toward the Thunder's staff. In 2014, he partnered with KIND snacks
and launched StrongAndKind.com to show "being kind is not a sign of weakness."

Throughout his career, Durant has participated in philanthropic causes. In 2013,
he pledged $1 million to the American Red Cross for the victims of the 2013
Moore tornado. His generosity inspired the Thunder and Nike to match his
donation. He is also a spokesperson for the Washington, D.C. branch of P'Tones
Records, a nationwide non-profit after-school music program.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Donald_Trump

Donald John Trump (born June 14, 1946) is an American businessman, television
personality, politician, and the 45th President of the United States.

He was born in Jamaica, Queens, New York City where he lived until enrolling at
age 13 in the New York Military Academy. Trump earned an economics degree from
the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania in 1968. In 1971, he took
charge of his family's real estate and construction firm, Elizabeth Trump & Son,
which was later renamed The Trump Organization. During his business career,
Trump built, renovated, and managed numerous office towers, hotels, casinos, and
golf courses. He has lent the use of his name in the branding of various
products. He owned the Miss USA and Miss Universe pageants from 1996 to 2015,
and he hosted The Apprentice, a reality television series on NBC, from 2004 to
2015. As of 2016[update], Forbes listed him as the 324th wealthiest person in
the world, and 113th in the United States, with a net worth of $4.5 billion.

Trump sought the Reform Party's 2000 presidential nomination, but withdrew
before voting began. He considered running as a Republican for the 2012
election, but decided against it. In June 2015, he announced his candidacy for
the 2016 election, and quickly emerged as the front-runner among 17 candidates
in the Republican primaries. His final opponents suspended their campaigns in
May 2016, and in July he was formally nominated at the Republican National
Convention along with Indiana governor Mike Pence as his running mate. His
campaign received unprecedented media coverage and international attention. Many
of the statements that he made in interviews, on social media, and at campaign
rallies were controversial or false.

Trump won the general election on November 8, 2016, in a surprise victory
against Democratic opponent Hillary Clinton. He became the oldest and wealthiest
person to assume the presidency, the first without prior military or government
service, and the fifth elected with less than a plurality of the national
popular vote.

Trump's platform emphasizes renegotiating U.S.–China relations and free trade
agreements such as NAFTA and the Trans-Pacific Partnership, strongly enforcing
immigration laws, and building a new wall along the U.S.–Mexico border. His
other positions include pursuing energy independence while opposing climate
change regulations such as the Clean Power Plan and the Paris Agreement,
modernizing and expediting services for veterans, repealing and replacing the
Affordable Care Act, abolishing Common Core education standards, investing in
infrastructure, simplifying the tax code while reducing taxes for all economic
classes, and imposing tariffs on imports by companies that offshore jobs. He
advocates a largely non-interventionist approach to foreign policy while
increasing military spending, "extreme vetting" of immigrants from
Muslim-majority countries to preempt domestic Islamic terrorism, and aggressive
military action against ISIS. His positions have been described by scholars and
commentators as populist, protectionist, and nationalist.

Trump was born on June 14, 1946 at the Jamaica Hospital Medical Center in the
Jamaica neighborhood of Queens, New York City. He was the fourth of five
children born to Frederick Christ "Fred" Trump (1905–1999) and Mary Anne Trump
(née MacLeod, 1912–2000). His siblings are Maryanne, Fred Jr., Elizabeth, and
Robert. Trump's older brother Fred Jr. died in 1981 from alcoholism, which Trump
says led him to abstain from alcohol and cigarettes.

Trump is of paternal German ancestry and maternal Scottish ancestry. His mother
and grandparents were born in Europe.

His paternal grandfather, Friedrich Trump, originally emigrated to the United
States in 1885, became a citizen in 1892, and amassed a fortune operating
boom-town restaurants and boarding houses in the Seattle area and Klondike,
Canada. After marrying in 1902, the family moved back to Kallstadt but were
ordered to leave because Friedrich did not complete the mandatory military
service and did not register his initial emigration to the United States.

His father was born in the Bronx, and became a New York City real estate
developer. His mother emigrated from her birthplace of Tong, Lewis, Scotland to
New York, where she worked as a maid. Fred and Mary met in New York and married
in 1936, raising their family in Queens.

His uncle John G. Trump—a professor at MIT from 1936 to 1973—was involved in
radar research for the Allies in World War II, and helped design X-ray machines
that prolonged the lives of cancer patients. in January 1943, physicist Nikola
Tesla died in his room at the New Yorker Hotel, and the FBI requested John Trump
to examine Tesla's papers and equipment.

The Trump family were originally Lutherans, but Trump's parents belonged to the
Reformed Church in America. The family name, which was formerly spelled Drumpf,
was changed to Trump during the Thirty Years' War in the 17th century. Trump has
said that he is proud of his German heritage; he served as grand marshal of the
1999 German-American Steuben Parade in New York City.

Trump attended the Kew-Forest School. At 13, he enrolled in the New York
Military Academy (NYMA), in Cornwall, New York, where he completed his primary
and secondary education.

In August 1964, Trump began a two-year stint at Fordham University in the Bronx.
He then transferred to the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania in
Philadelphia, which offered one of the few real estate studies departments in
United States academia at the time. While there, he worked at the family's
company, Elizabeth Trump & Son, named for his paternal grandmother. He graduated
from Penn in May 1968 with a Bachelor of Science degree in economics.

Trump was not drafted during the Vietnam War. While in college from 1964 to
1968, he obtained four student deferments. In 1966, he was deemed fit for
service based upon a military medical examination, and in 1968 was briefly
classified as fit by a local draft board, but was given a 1-Y medical deferment
in October 1968. He attributed his medical deferment to heel spurs. In 1969, he
received a high number in the draft lottery, which would also have likely
exempted him from service.

Trump has five children by three marriages, and has eight grandchildren. His
first two marriages ended in widely publicized divorces.

Trump married his first wife, Czech model Ivana Zelníčková, in 1977 at the
Marble Collegiate Church in Manhattan in a ceremony performed by the Reverend
Norman Vincent Peale. They had three children: son Donald Jr. (born 1977),
daughter Ivanka (born 1981), and son Eric (born 1984). Ivana became a
naturalized United States citizen in 1988. The couple divorced in 1990 following
Trump's affair with actress Marla Maples.

In 1993, Maples gave birth to their daughter Tiffany, named after Tiffany &
Company, a high-end luxury retailer. They married two months later, and divorced
in 1999.

In 2005, Trump, then 58 years of age, married Slovene model Melania Knauss at
Bethesda-by-the-Sea Episcopal Church on the island of Palm Beach, Florida. A
reception followed at Trump's Mar-a-Lago estate.

In 2006, Melania became a naturalized United States citizen. Later that year,
she gave birth to their son Barron, who became fluent in Slovene and English.
Melania Trump is now the First Lady of the United States.

Trump identifies as Presbyterian. As a child, he began going to church at the
First Presbyterian Church in Jamaica, Queens. He attended Sunday school and had
his confirmation at that church. Trump said in 2015 that he attends Reformed
Marble Collegiate Church in Manhattan, where he married his first wife Ivana in
1977, and the church says he is not an "active member". He is also loosely
affiliated with Lakeside Presbyterian Church in West Palm Beach, Florida, near
his Mar-a-Lago estate. In December 2016, Trump visited Bethesda-by-the-Sea, an
Episcopal church, for Christmas services.

Trump has said that he participates in Holy Communion. Beyond that, he has not
asked God for forgiveness, stating: "I think if I do something wrong, I just try
and make it right. I don't bring God into that picture."

Trump refers to his ghostwritten book The Art of the Deal as "my second favorite
book of all time, after the Bible. Nothing beats the Bible". In a speech to
Liberty University, he referred to Second Corinthians as "Two Corinthians",
eliciting chuckles from the audience. Despite this, The New York Times reported
that Evangelical Christians nationwide thought "that his heart was in the right
place, that his intentions for the country were pure".

Outside of his church affiliations, Trump has relationships with a number of
Christian spiritual leaders, including Florida pastor Paula White, who has been
described as his "closest spiritual confidant." In 2015, he asked for and
received a blessing from Greek Orthodox priest Emmanuel Lemelson and, in 2016,
released a list of his religious advisers, including James Dobson, Jerry Falwell
Jr., Ralph Reed and others.

Referring to his daughter Ivanka's conversion to Judaism before her marriage to
Jared Kushner, Trump said in 2015: "I have a Jewish daughter; and I am very
honored by that […] it wasn't in the plan but I am very glad it happened."

A 2016 medical report issued by his doctor, Harold Bornstein M.D., showed that
Trump's blood pressure, liver and thyroid function were in normal ranges. Trump
says that he has never smoked cigarettes or consumed other drugs, including
marijuana. He also does not drink alcohol, a decision stemming from his
brother's death from alcoholism.

Trump was listed on the initial Forbes List of wealthy individuals in 1982 as
having an estimated $200 million fortune, including a share of his father's
estimated $200 million net worth. He was absent from the list from 1990 to 1995
following losses which reportedly obliged him to borrow from his siblings'
trusts in 1993. Trump told campaign audiences he began his career with "a small
loan of one million dollars" from his father, which he paid back with interest.

When he announced his candidacy on June 16, 2015, Trump released a one-page
financial summary that stated a net worth of $8,737,540,000. "I'm really rich",
he said. Forbes believed his suggestion of $9 billion was "a whopper", figuring
it was actually $4.1 billion. The summary statement includes $3.3 billion worth
of "real estate licensing deals, brand and branded developments", putting a
figure on Trump's estimate of his own brand value. The July 2015 FEC disclosure
reports assets worth above $1.4 billion and debts above $265 million. According
to Bloomberg, Trump "only reported revenue for [his] golf properties in his
campaign filings even though the disclosure form asks for income", whereas
independent filings showed his European golf properties to be unprofitable.
Trump has stated that his income for the year 2014 was $362 million.

After Trump made controversial remarks about illegal immigrants in 2015, he lost
business contracts with NBCUniversal, Univision, Macy's, Serta, PVH Corporation,
and Perfumania, which Forbes estimated negatively impacted his net worth by
$125 million. The value of the Trump brand may have fallen further during his
presidential campaign, as some consumers boycotted Trump-branded products and
services to protest his candidacy. Bookings and foot traffic at Trump-branded
properties fell off sharply in 2016, and the release of the Access Hollywood
tape recordings in October 2016 exacerbated this.

In their 2016 annual billionaires' rankings, Forbes estimated Trump's net worth
at $4.5 billion (113th in the United States, 324th in the world) and Bloomberg
at $3 billion, making him one of the richest politicians in American history.
Trump himself stated that his net worth was over $10 billion, with the
discrepancy essentially stemming from the uncertain value of appraised property
and of his personal brand.

Prior to graduating from the University of Pennsylvania, Trump began his real
estate career at his father's company, Elizabeth Trump and Son, which focused on
middle-class rental housing in the New York City boroughs of Brooklyn, Queens,
and Staten Island. During his undergraduate study, Donald Trump and his father,
Fred Trump, used a $500,000 investment to successfully reopen the foreclosed
Swifton Village apartment complex in Cincinnati, Ohio.

After being promoted to president of the company in the early 1970s (while his
father became chairman of the board), he renamed it to The Trump Organization.
In 1973, he and his father drew wider attention when the Justice Department
contended that the organization systematically discriminated against African
Americans wishing to rent apartments, rather than merely screening out people
based on low income as the Trumps stated. An agreement was later signed in which
the Trumps made no admission of wrongdoing, and under which qualified minority
applicants would be presented by the Urban League.

In 1978, Trump consummated his first major real estate deal in Manhattan with
the remodeling of the Grand Hyatt Hotel, located next to Grand Central Terminal.
The building was remodeled from an older Commodore Hotel, and was largely funded
by a $70 million construction loan jointly guaranteed by Fred Trump and the
Hyatt hotel chain.

Also in 1978, Trump finished negotiations to develop Trump Tower, a 58-story,
202-meter (663-foot) skyscraper in Midtown Manhattan, for which The New York
Times attributed his "persistence" and "skills as a negotiator". The building
was completed in 1983, and houses both the primary penthouse condominium
residence of Donald Trump and the headquarters of The Trump Organization. Trump
Tower was the setting of the NBC television show The Apprentice, and includes a
fully functional television studio set.

Repairs on the Wollman Rink (originally opened in 1949 in Central Park) were
started in 1980 by a general contractor unconnected to Trump. Despite an
expected  2 1⁄2-year construction schedule, the repairs were not completed by
1986. Trump took over the project, completed it in three months for $750,000
less than the initial budget of $1.95 million, and operated the rink for one
year with all profits going to charity in exchange for the rink's concession
rights.

Trump acquired the Plaza Hotel in Manhattan in 1988 for $400 million, and asked
his then-wife Ivana to manage its operation and renovation.

Trump acquired the historic Mar-a-Lago estate in Palm Beach, Florida, in 1985
for $5 million, plus $3 million for the home's furnishings. It was built from
1924 to 1927 by heiress and socialite Marjorie Merriweather Post, who envisioned
the house as a future winter retreat for American presidents.

In addition to using the home for this purpose, Trump also turned it into a
private club with membership fees of $150,000. At about the same time, he
acquired a condominium complex in Palm Beach with Lee Iacocca that became Trump
Plaza of the Palm Beaches.

Harrah's at Trump Plaza opened in Atlantic City, New Jersey in 1984. The
hotel/casino was built by Trump with financing by Holiday Corp. and operated by
the Harrah's gambling unit of Holiday Corp. The casino's poor results
exacerbated disagreements between Trump and Holiday Corp. Trump also acquired a
partially completed building in Atlantic City from the Hilton Corporation for
$320 million. When completed in 1985, the hotel/casino became Trump Castle.
Trump's wife, Ivana, managed the property.

Later in 1988, Trump acquired the Taj Mahal casino in Atlantic City in a
transaction with Merv Griffin and Resorts International. The casino was opened
in April 1990, and was built at a total cost of $1.1 billion, which at the time
made it the most expensive casino ever built. Financed with $675 million in junk
bonds at a 14% interest rate, the project entered Chapter 11 bankruptcy the
following year. Banks and bondholders, facing potential losses of hundreds of
millions of dollars, opted to restructure the debt.

The Taj Mahal emerged from bankruptcy on October 5, 1991, with Trump ceding
50 percent ownership in the casino to the bondholders in exchange for lowered
interest rates and more time to pay off the debt. He also sold his financially
challenged Trump Shuttle airline and his 282-foot (86 m) megayacht, the Trump
Princess. The property was repurchased in 1996 and consolidated into Trump
Hotels & Casino Resorts, which filed for bankruptcy in 2004 with $1.8 billion in
debt, filing again for bankruptcy five years later with $50 million in assets
and $500 million in debt. The restructuring ultimately left Trump with 10%
ownership in the Trump Taj Mahal and other Trump casino properties. Trump served
as chairman of the organization, which was renamed Trump Entertainment Resorts,
from mid-1995 until early 2009, and served as CEO from mid-2000 to mid-2005.

In 2011 after Chris Christie became governor, Trump casinos settled a
long-running $30 million tax dispute for 17 cents on the dollar. In 2015, the
Taj Mahal's parent company settled for $10 million in a money-laundering lawsuit
brought by the U.S. government, admitting only to record-keeping and reporting
violations.

During the 1990s, Trump's casino ventures faced competition from the
Native-American owned Foxwoods casino in Connecticut. In 1993, Trump made
controversial comments in his testimony to a Congressional committee, famously
stating that the casino owners did not look like real Indians. But despite that
well-publicized quote which related to the Mashantucket Pequot Tribe, Trump
became a key investor who backed the Paucatuck Eastern Pequots who were seeking
state recognition.

Trump has never filed for personal bankruptcy, but his hotel and casino
businesses have been declared bankrupt six times between 1991 and 2009 in order
to re-negotiate debt with banks and owners of stock and bonds. Because the
businesses used Chapter 11 bankruptcy, they were allowed to operate while
negotiations proceeded. Trump was quoted by Newsweek in 2011 saying, "I do play
with the bankruptcy laws – they're very good for me" as a tool for trimming
debt.

The six bankruptcies were the result of over-leveraged hotel and casino
businesses in Atlantic City and New York: Trump Taj Mahal (1991), Trump Plaza
Hotel and Casino (1992), Plaza Hotel (1992), Trump Castle Hotel and Casino
(1992), Trump Hotels and Casino Resorts (2004), and Trump Entertainment Resorts
(2009). Trump said, "I've used the laws of this country to pare debt ... We'll
have the company. We'll throw it into a chapter. We'll negotiate with the banks.
We'll make a fantastic deal. You know, it's like on The Apprentice. It's not
personal. It's just business."

A 2016 analysis of Trump's business career by The Economist concluded that his
"… performance [from 1985 to 2016] has been mediocre compared with the stock
market and property in New York", noting both his successes and bankruptcies. A
subsequent analysis by The Washington Post concluded that "Trump is a mix of
braggadocio, business failures, and real success."

Trump claimed a loss of $916 million on his 1995 tax returns. As net operating
losses from one year can be applied to offset income from future years, this
loss allowed him to reduce or eliminate his taxable income during the
eighteen-year carry forward period. Trump acknowledged using the deduction but
declined to provide details such as the specific years it was applied. When
questioned during a presidential debate about such practices, he stated that
avoiding paying income tax through such methods "makes me smart".

The New York Times found that some accountants considered Trump's tax deduction
methods in the early 1990s "legally dubious". Independent tax experts stated
that "Whatever loophole existed was not 'exploited' here, but stretched beyond
any recognition" and that it involved "sleight of hand", further speculating
that Trump's casino bankruptcies were probably related to Trump's 1995 reported
loss.

An analysis by USA Today, published in June 2016, found that over the previous
three decades, Trump and his businesses had been involved in 3,500 legal cases
in U.S. federal courts and state courts, an unprecedented number for a U.S.
presidential candidate. Of the 3,500 suits, mostly in the casino industry, Trump
or one of his companies was the plaintiff in 1,900; defendant in 1,450; and
third party, filer of bankruptcy, or other in 150. Trump was named in at least
169 suits in federal court.

In 1996, Trump acquired a vacant seventy-story skyscraper on Wall Street—the
former Bank of Manhattan Trust Building—which had briefly been the tallest
building in the world when it was completed in 1930. After an extensive
renovation, the high-rise was renamed the Trump Building at 40 Wall Street.
After his father died in 1999, Trump and his siblings received equal
portions[not in citation given] of his father's estate valued at $250–300
million.

In 2001, Trump completed Trump World Tower, a 72-story residential tower across
from the United Nations Headquarters. Trump also began construction on Trump
Place, a multi-building development along the Hudson River. He continued to own
commercial space in Trump International Hotel and Tower, a 44-story mixed-use
(hotel and condominium) tower on Columbus Circle which he acquired in 1996, and
also continued to own millions of square feet of other prime Manhattan real
estate.

Trump acquired the former Hotel Delmonico in Manhattan in 2002. It was re-opened
with 35 stories of luxury condominiums in 2004 as the Trump Park Avenue.

Most recently, The Trump Organization has expanded its footprint beyond the
United States, with the co-development and management of hotel towers in
Chicago, Honolulu, Las Vegas, New York City, Washington D.C., Panama City, Rio
de Janeiro, Toronto, and Vancouver.

Trump has pursued business deals in Russia since 1987, although his real estate
projects there never materialized. In 1996, Trump filed trademark applications
for potential Russian real estate development deals. Along with his partners and
children, Trump visited Moscow several times, connecting with developers and
government officials to explore joint venture opportunities. However, some of
his real estate developments outside Russia have received a large part of their
financing from private Russian investors, sometimes referred to as "oligarchs".
In 2008 his son Donald Trump Jr. said "Russians make up a pretty
disproportionate cross-section of a lot of our assets" and "we see a lot of
money pouring in from Russia". Trump hosted the 2013 Miss Universe pageant in
Moscow, in partnership with Russian billionaire Aras Agalarov, but, as of 2017,
he has no known investments or businesses in Russia.

The Trump Organization operates many golf courses and resorts in the United
States and around the world. According to Golfweek, Trump owns or manages about
18 golf courses. Trump's personal financial disclosure with the Federal
Elections Commission stated that his golf and resort revenue for the year 2015
was roughly $382 million.

In 2006, Trump bought the Menie Estate in Balmedie, Aberdeenshire, Scotland and
created a golf resort against the wishes of some local residents on an area
designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest. A 2011 independent
documentary, You've Been Trumped, by British filmmaker Anthony S. Baxter,
chronicled the golf resort's construction and the subsequent nimbyism struggles
between the locals and Trump. Despite Trump's promises of 6,000 jobs, he stated
in 2016 that the golf course has created only 200 jobs. In June 2015, Trump made
an appeal objecting to an offshore windfarm being built within sight of the golf
course, which was dismissed by five justices at the UK Supreme Court in December
2015.

In April 2014, Trump purchased the Turnberry hotel and golf resort in Ayrshire,
Scotland, which hosted the Open Championship 4 times between 1977 and 2009.
After extensive renovations and a remodeling of the course by golf architect
Martin Ebert, Turnberry was re-opened on June 24, 2016.

In 1971, Trump took charge of the family real estate firm, Elizabeth Trump &
Son, and later renamed it The Trump Organization. He greatly expanded its real
estate operations and also ventured into numerous other business activities. The
company eventually became the umbrella organization for several hundred
individual business ventures and partnerships.

When Trump was elected president in November 2016, the question arose how he
would avoid conflicts of interest with his work in the White House and his
business activities. At a press conference on January 10, 2017, Trump said he
and his daughter Ivanka would resign all roles with The Trump Organization,
while his two oldest sons Don Jr. and Eric would run the business, together with
Chief Financial Officer Allen Weisselberg.

Trump retains his financial stake in the business. His attorney Sherri Dillon
said that before the January 20 inauguration, Trump would put those business
assets into a trust, which would hire an ethics advisor and a compliance
counsel. She added that the Trump Organization would not pursue any new foreign
business deals, while continuing to pursue domestic opportunities.

In September 1983, Trump purchased the New Jersey Generals—an American Football
team that played in the United States Football League—from oil magnate J. Walter
Duncan. The USFL played its first three seasons during the spring and summer,
but Trump convinced the majority of the owners of other USFL teams to move the
USFL's 1986 schedule to the fall. He argued that the new schedule would coincide
with the National Football League and would eventually force a merger with the
NFL, thereby significantly increasing their investment.

After the 1985 season, the Generals merged with the Houston Gamblers, but the
organization experienced continuous financial difficulties. The USFL was down to
just seven active franchises from a high of eighteen and was soon forced to
fold, despite winning an antitrust lawsuit against the NFL.

Trump remained involved with other sports after the Generals folded, operating
golf courses in several countries. He also hosted several boxing matches in
Atlantic City at the Trump Plaza, including Mike Tyson's 1988 fight against
Michael Spinks, and at one time, acted as a financial advisor to Tyson.

In 1989 and 1990, Trump lent his name to the Tour de Trump cycling stage race,
which was an attempt to create an American equivalent of European races such as
the Tour de France or the Giro d'Italia. The inaugural race was controversial,
and Trump withdrew his sponsorship after the second Tour de Trump in 1990,
because his other business ventures were experiencing financial woes. The race
continued for several more years as the Tour DuPont.

Trump submitted a stalking-horse bid on the Buffalo Bills when it came up for
sale following Ralph Wilson's death in 2014; he was ultimately outbid, as he
expected, and Kim and Terrence Pegula won the auction. During his 2016
presidential run, he was critical of the NFL's updated concussion rules,
complaining on the campaign trail that the game has been made "soft" and "weak",
saying a concussion is just "a ding on the head". He accused referees of
throwing penalty flags needlessly just to be seen on television "so their wives
see them at home."

From 1996 until 2015, Trump owned part or all of the Miss Universe, Miss USA,
and Miss Teen USA beauty pageants. The Miss Universe pageant was founded in 1952
by the California clothing company Pacific Mills. Trump was dissatisfied with
how CBS scheduled his pageants, and took both Miss Universe and Miss USA to NBC
in 2002.

In 2015, NBC and Univision both ended their business relationships with the Miss
Universe Organization after Trump's controversial 2015 presidential campaign
remarks about Mexican illegal immigrants. Trump subsequently filed a $500
million lawsuit against Univision, alleging a breach of contract and defamation.
The lawsuit was settled in February 2016, but terms of the settlement were not
disclosed.

On September 11, 2015, Trump announced that he had become the sole owner of the
Miss Universe Organization by purchasing NBC's stake. He sold his own interests
in the pageant shortly afterwards to WME/IMG.

In 1999, Trump founded a modeling company, Trump Model Management, which
operates in the SoHo neighborhood of Lower Manhattan. Together with another
Trump company, Trump Management Group LLC, Trump Model Management has brought
nearly 250 foreign fashion models into the United States to work in the fashion
industry since 2000. In 2014, the company, along with its president Corrine
Nicolas and other managers, were sued by one of the agency's former models,
Alexia Palmer, alleging racketeering, breach of contract, mail fraud, and
violating immigrant wage laws. Palmer alleged that Trump Model Management
promised to withhold only 20% of her net pay as agency expenses, but after
charging her for "obscure expenses", ended up taking 80%. The case was dismissed
from U.S. federal court in March 2016, in part because Palmer's immigration
status, via H1-B visa sponsored by Trump, required labor complaints to be filed
through a separate process.

Trump University LLC was an American for-profit education company that ran a
real estate training program from 2005 until at least 2010. After multiple
lawsuits, the business is now defunct. It was founded by Trump and his
associates, Michael Sexton and Jonathan Spitalny, and offered courses, charging
between $1,500 and $35,000 per course. In 2005 the operation was notified by New
York State authorities that its use of the word "university" violated state law,
and after a second such notification in 2010, the name of the company was
changed to the "Trump Entrepreneurial Institute". Trump was also found
personally liable for failing to obtain a business license for the operation.

In 2013, the State of New York filed a $40 million civil suit alleging that
Trump University made false claims and defrauded consumers. In addition, two
class-action civil lawsuits were filed in federal court relating to Trump
University; they named Trump personally as well as his companies. During the
presidential campaign, Trump repeatedly criticized Judge Gonzalo P. Curiel who
oversaw those two cases, alleging bias because of his Mexican heritage. On June
7, 2016, Trump clarified that his concerns about Curiel's impartiality were not
based upon ethnicity alone, but also upon rulings in the case.

The Low v. Trump case was set for trial on November 28, 2016 in San Diego.
Shortly after Trump won the presidency, the parties agreed to a settlement of
all three pending cases. In the settlement, Trump did not admit to any
wrongdoing but agreed to pay a total of $25 million. The litigants agreed to the
settlement just an hour before a hearing regarding Trump's latest request to
delay the trial until after the inauguration. Jason Forge, the attorney for the
plaintiffs, said he "definitely detected a change of tone and change of
approach" from the Trump representatives after the election.

Trump has marketed his name on a large number of building projects that are
owned and operated by other people and companies, as well as licensing his name
for various commercial products and services. In doing so, he achieved mixed
success for himself, his partners, and investors in the projects. In 2011,
Forbes' financial experts estimated the value of the Trump brand at
$200 million. Trump disputed this valuation, saying his brand was worth about
$3 billion.

Because developers pay Trump to market their properties and to be the public
face for their projects, some buildings that display his name are not owned or
operated by him. According to Forbes, this portion of Trump's empire, actually
run by his children, is by far his most valuable, having a $562 million
valuation, with 33 licensing projects under development including seven Trump
International Hotel and Tower "condo hotels".

Properties to which Trump has licensed his name and image include two in Florida
that have gone into foreclosure. The Turkish owner of Trump Towers Istanbul, who
pays Trump for the use of his name, was reported in December 2015 to be
exploring legal means to dissociate the property after the candidate's call to
temporarily ban Muslims from entering the United States.

Trump also licensed his name to son-in-law Jared Kushner's fifty-story Trump Bay
Street, a Jersey City luxury development that has raised $50 million of its
$200 million capitalization largely from wealthy Chinese nationals who, after
making an initial down payment of $500,000 in concert with the government's
expedited EB-5 visa program, can usually obtain United States permanent
residency for themselves and their families after two years. Trump is a partner
with Kushner Properties only in name licensing and not in the building's
financing.

The Donald J. Trump Foundation is a U.S.-based private foundation established in
1988 for the initial purpose of giving away proceeds from the book Trump: The
Art of the Deal by Trump and Tony Schwartz. The foundation's funds have mostly
come from donors other than Trump, who has not given personally to the charity
since 2008.

The foundation's tax returns show that it has given to health care and
sports-related charities, as well as conservative groups. In 2009, for example,
the foundation gave $926,750 to about 40 groups, with the biggest donations
going to the Arnold Palmer Medical Center Foundation ($100,000), the New
York–Presbyterian Hospital ($125,000), the Police Athletic League ($156,000),
and the Clinton Foundation ($100,000). From 2004 to 2014, the top donors to the
foundation were Vince and Linda McMahon of WWE, who donated $5 million to the
foundation after Trump appeared at WrestleMania in 2007. Linda McMahon later
became Administrator of the Small Business Administration.

In 2016, investigations by The Washington Post uncovered several potential legal
and ethical violations conducted by the charity, including alleged self-dealing
and possible tax evasion. After beginning an investigation into the foundation,
the New York State Attorney General's office notified the Trump Foundation that
it was allegedly in violation of New York laws regarding charities, and ordered
it to immediately cease its fundraising activities in New York. A Trump
spokesman called the investigation a "partisan hit job". In response to mounting
complaints, Trump's team announced in late December 2016 that the Trump
Foundation would be dissolved to remove "even the appearance of any conflict
with [his] role as President".

Trump has twice been nominated for an Emmy Award and has made cameo appearances
in 12 films and 14 television series. He has also played an oil tycoon in The
Little Rascals. Trump is a member of the Screen Actors Guild and receives an
annual pension of more than $110,000. He has been the subject of comedians,
flash cartoon artists, and online caricature artists. Trump also had his own
daily talk radio program called Trumped!

In 2003, Trump became the executive producer and host of the NBC reality show
The Apprentice, in which a group of competitors battled for a high-level
management job in one of Trump's commercial enterprises. Contestants were
successively "fired" and eliminated from the game. For the first year of the
show, Trump earned $50,000 per episode (roughly $700,000 for the first season),
but following the show's initial success, he was paid $1 million per episode. In
a July 2015 press release, Trump's campaign manager said that NBCUniversal had
paid him $213,606,575 for his 14 seasons hosting the show, although the network
did not verify the statement. In 2007, Trump received a star on the Hollywood
Walk of Fame for his contribution to television on The Apprentice.

Along with British TV producer Mark Burnett, Trump was hired as host of The
Celebrity Apprentice, in which celebrities compete to win money for their
charities. While Trump and Burnett co-produced the show, Trump stayed in the
forefront, deciding winners and "firing" losers. International versions of The
Apprentice franchise were co-produced by Burnett and Trump.

On February 16, 2015, NBC announced that they would be renewing The Apprentice
for a 15th season. On February 27, Trump stated that he was "not ready" to sign
on for another season because of the possibility of a presidential run. Despite
this, on March 18, NBC announced they were going ahead with production. On June
29, after widespread negative reaction stemming from Trump's campaign
announcement speech, NBC released a statement saying, "Due to the recent
derogatory statements by Donald Trump regarding immigrants, NBCUniversal is
ending its business relationship with Mr. Trump."

After Trump's election campaign and presidential win led to his departure from
the program, actor and former California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger replaced
Trump as host for the fifteenth season. Trump is still credited as an executive
producer for the show.

Trump is a World Wrestling Entertainment fan and a friend of WWE chairman Vince
McMahon. In 1988–89 Trump hosted WrestleMania IV and V at Boardwalk Hall (dubbed
"Trump Plaza" for storyline purposes) and has been an active participant in
several of the shows. He also appeared in WrestleMania VII, and was interviewed
ringside at WrestleMania XX.

Trump appeared at WrestleMania 23 in a match called "The Battle of the
Billionaires". He was in Bobby Lashley's corner, while Vince McMahon was in the
corner of Lashley's opponent Umaga, with Stone Cold Steve Austin as the special
guest referee. The terms of the match were that either Trump or McMahon would
have their head shaved if their competitor lost. Lashley won the match, and so
McMahon was shaved bald.

On June 15, 2009, McMahon announced as part of a storyline on Monday Night Raw
that he had "sold" the show to Trump. Appearing on screen, Trump declared that
he would be at the following commercial-free episode in person and would give a
full refund to the people who purchased tickets to the arena for that night's
show. McMahon "bought back" Raw the following week for twice the price.

In 2013, Trump was inducted into the celebrity wing of the WWE Hall of Fame at
Madison Square Garden for his contributions to the promotion. He made his sixth
WrestleMania appearance the following night at WrestleMania 29.

Trump considered the idea of running for president in 1988, 2004, and 2012, and
for Governor of New York in 2006 and 2014, but did not enter those respective
races. In February 2009, Trump appeared on the Late Show with David Letterman,
and spoke about the automotive industry crisis of 2008–10. He said that "instead
of asking for money", General Motors "should go into bankruptcy and work that
stuff out in a deal".

Trump publicly speculated about seeking the 2012 Republican presidential
nomination, and a Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll released in March 2011 found
Trump leading among potential contenders; he was one point ahead of former
Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney. A Newsweek poll conducted in February 2011
showed Trump within a few points of incumbent president Barack Obama, with many
voters undecided in the November 2012 general election for president of the
United States. A poll released in April 2011 by Public Policy Polling showed
Trump having a nine-point lead in a potential contest for the Republican
nomination for president while he was still actively considering a run. His
moves were interpreted by some media as possible promotional tools for his
reality show The Apprentice.

Trump played a leading role in "birther" conspiracy theories that had been
circulating since President Obama's 2008 presidential campaign. Beginning in
March 2011, Trump publicly questioned Obama's citizenship and eligibility to
serve as President. Although the Obama campaign had released a copy of the
short-form birth certificate in 2008, Trump demanded to see the original
"long-form" certificate. He mentioned having sent investigators to Hawaii to
research the question, but he did not follow up with any findings. He also
repeated a debunked allegation that Obama's grandmother said she had witnessed
his birth in Kenya. When the White House later released Obama's long-form birth
certificate, Trump took credit for obtaining the document, saying "I hope it
checks out." His official biography mentions his purported role in forcing
Obama's hand, and he has defended his pursuit of the issue when prompted, later
saying that his promotion of the conspiracy made him "very popular". In 2011,
Trump had called for Obama to release his student records, questioning whether
his grades warranted entry into an Ivy League school. When asked in 2015 whether
he believed Obama was born in the United States, Trump said he did not want to
discuss the matter further. In September 2016, Trump publicly acknowledged that
Obama was born in the U.S., and said that the rumors had been started by Hillary
Clinton during her 2008 presidential campaign.

Trump made his first speaking appearance at the Conservative Political Action
Conference (CPAC) in February 2011. His appearance at CPAC was organized by
GOProud, an LGBT conservative organization, in conjunction with GOProud
supporter Roger Stone, who was close with Trump. GOProud pushed for a write-in
campaign for Trump at CPAC's presidential straw poll. The 2011 CPAC speech Trump
gave is credited for helping kick-start his political career within the
Republican Party. Christopher R. Barron, co-founder of GOProud, would later
endorse Trump's 2016 presidential campaign, and launch "LGBT for Trump", a
political campaign with the goal of gaining the LGBT community's political
support for Donald Trump.

In the 2012 Republican primaries, Trump generally had polled at or below 17
percent among the crowded field of possible candidates. On May 16, 2011, Trump
announced he would not run for president in the 2012 election, while also saying
he would have become the President of the United States, had he ran.

In 2013, Trump was a featured speaker at the Conservative Political Action
Conference (CPAC). During the lightly attended early-morning speech, Trump spoke
out against illegal immigration, then-President Obama's "unprecedented media
protection", and advised against harming Medicare, Medicaid and Social Security.

Additionally, Trump spent over $1 million in 2013 to research a possible run for
president of the United States. In October 2013, New York Republicans circulated
a memo suggesting Trump should run for governor of the state in 2014 against
Andrew Cuomo. In response to the memo, Trump said that while New York had
problems and that its taxes were too high, running for governor was not of great
interest to him. In January 2014, Trump made statements denying climate change
that were discordant with the opinion of the scientific community. A February
2014 Quinnipiac poll had shown Trump losing to the more popular Cuomo by 37
points in a hypothetical election. In February 2015, Trump told NBC that he was
not prepared to sign on for another season of The Apprentice, as he mulled his
political future.

In 1999, Trump filed an exploratory committee to seek the presidential
nomination of the Reform Party in 2000. A July 1999 poll matching him against
likely Republican nominee George W. Bush and likely Democratic nominee Al Gore
showed Trump with seven percent support. Trump eventually dropped out of the
race due to party infighting, but still won the party's California and Michigan
primaries after doing so.

Trump's political party affiliation has changed numerous times over the years.
Trump's political party affiliations prior to 1987 remain unclear, though Trump
was an early supporter of Republican Ronald Reagan for United States President
in the late 1970s. By 1987, Trump had identified as a Republican.

In 1999, Trump switched to the Reform Party for three years and ran a
presidential exploratory campaign for its nomination. After his run, Trump left
the party in 2001 due to the involvement of David Duke, Pat Buchanan, and Lenora
Fulani.

From 2001 to 2008, Trump identified as a Democrat, but in 2008, he endorsed
Republican John McCain for President. In 2009, he officially changed his party
registration to Republican. In December 2011, Trump became an independent for
five months before returning to the Republican Party, where he later pledged to
stay.

Trump has made contributions to campaigns of both Republican Party and
Democratic Party candidates, with the top ten recipients of his political
contributions being six Democrats and four Republicans. After 2011, his campaign
contributions were more favorable to Republicans than to Democrats. In February
2012, Trump openly endorsed Republican Mitt Romney for President. When asked in
2015 which recent president he prefers, Trump picked Democrat Bill Clinton over
the Republican Bushes.

According to a New York state report, Trump circumvented corporate and personal
campaign donation limits in the 1980s—although no laws were broken—by donating
money to candidates from 18 different business subsidiaries, rather than
donating primarily in his own name. Trump told investigators he did so on the
advice of his lawyers. He also said the contributions were not to gain favor
with business-friendly candidates, but simply to satisfy requests from friends.

On June 16, 2015, Trump announced his candidacy for President of the United
States at Trump Tower in Manhattan. In the speech, Trump drew attention to
domestic issues such as illegal immigration, offshoring of American jobs, the
U.S. national debt, and Islamic terrorism, which all remained large priorities
during the campaign. He also announced his campaign slogan, "Make America Great
Again".

In his campaign, Trump said that he disdained political correctness; he also
stated that the media had intentionally misinterpreted his words, and he made
other claims of adverse media bias. In part due to his fame, Trump received an
unprecedented amount of unpaid coverage from the media during his run for the
presidency; this elevated his standing in the Republican primaries.

Republican leaders such as House Speaker Paul Ryan were hesitant to support him
during his early quest for the presidency. They doubted his chances of winning
the general election and feared that he could harm the image of the Republican
Party.

The alt-right movement coalesced around Trump's candidacy, due in part to its
opposition to multiculturalism and immigration. Trump was accused of pandering
to white nationalists. In August, he appointed Steve Bannon—the executive
chairman of Breitbart News—as his campaign CEO; the website was described by
Bannon as "the platform for the alt-right".

Some rallies during the primary season were accompanied by protests or violence,
including attacks on protesters inside the rallies, and clashes between
protesters and Trump supporters outside the venues.

Fact-checking organizations have denounced Trump for making a record number of
false statements compared to other candidates. At least four major
publications – Politico, The Washington Post, The New York Times, and the Los
Angeles Times – have pointed out lies or falsehoods in his campaign statements.
Trump's penchant for hyperbole is believed to have roots in the New York real
estate scene, where Trump established his wealth. Trump has called his public
speaking "truthful hyperbole", though online media outlets such as Yahoo!
believed Trump's "truthful hyperbole" to be a political tactic. Lucas Graves, an
assistant professor at the University of Wisconsin–Madison School of Journalism
& Mass Communication, opined, of Trump's speaking, that Trump "often speaks in a
suggestive way that makes it unclear what exactly he meant, so that
fact-checkers "have to be really careful when you pick claims to check to pick
things ... that reflect what the speaker was clearly trying to communicate".
Other sources, such as NPR, also observed that Trump's statements during the
campaign were often opaque or suggestive.

Trump entered a field of 16 candidates who were vying for the 2016 Republican
nomination; this was the largest presidential field in American history. Trump
participated in eleven of the twelve Republican debates, skipping only the
seventh debate on January 28 (that was the last debate before primary voting
began on February 1). The debates received historically high television ratings,
which increased the visibility of Trump's campaign.

By early 2016, the race had mostly centered on Trump and U.S. Senator Ted Cruz.
On Super Tuesday, Trump won the plurality of the vote and remained the
front-runner throughout the remainder of the primaries. By March 2016, Trump
became poised to win the Republican nomination. After a landslide win in Indiana
on May 3, 2016, which prompted the remaining candidates Ted Cruz and John Kasich
to suspend their presidential campaigns, RNC Chairman Reince Priebus declared
Trump the presumptive Republican nominee. With nearly 14 million votes, Trump
broke the all-time record for winning the most primary votes in the history of
the Republican Party. He also set the record for the largest number of votes
against the front runner.

After becoming the presumptive Republican nominee, Trump's focus shifted to the
general election, urging remaining primary voters to "save [their] vote for the
general election". Trump began targeting Hillary Clinton, who became the
presumptive Democratic nominee on June 6, 2016, and continued to campaign across
the country. One month before the Republican National Convention, Secret Service
agents thwarted an assassination attempt on Trump during one of his rallies in
Las Vegas; they seized a 20-year-old British man who was illegally residing in
the U.S.

Clinton had established a significant lead in national polls over Trump
throughout most of 2016. In early July, Clinton's lead narrowed in national
polling averages following the FBI's re-opening of its investigation into her
ongoing email controversy. In reference to the matter, FBI Director James Comey
opined Clinton had been "extremely careless" in her handling of classified
government material.

On July 15, 2016, Trump announced his selection of Indiana Governor Mike Pence
as his running mate. Trump and Pence were officially nominated by the Republican
Party on July 19, 2016, at the Republican National Convention. The list of
convention speakers and attendees included former presidential nominee Bob Dole,
but the other prior nominees did not attend, though John McCain endorsed Trump
prior to the convention.

Two days later, Trump officially accepted the nomination in a 76-minute speech
inspired by Richard Nixon's 1968 acceptance speech. The historically long speech
was watched by nearly 35 million people and received mixed reviews, with net
negative viewer reactions according to CNN and Gallup polls.

In late July, Trump came close to Clinton in national polls following a 3 to 4
percentage point convention bounce, in line with the average bounce in
conventions since 2004, although it was toward the small side by historical
standards. Following Clinton's 7 percent convention bounce, she significantly
extended her lead over Trump in national polls at the start of August.

Trump has declined to publicly release any of his full tax returns, which led to
speculation about whether or not he was hiding something. Pursuant to FEC
regulations, Trump published a 92-page financial disclosure form that listed all
his assets, liabilities, income sources and hundreds of business positions.

Trump said that his tax returns are being audited and his lawyers advise against
release. Trump has told the news media that his tax rate was "none of your
business", but added, "I fight very hard to pay as little tax as possible."
Every candidate since Gerald Ford in 1976 released their taxes before the
election. Although no law prohibits release of tax returns during an audit, tax
attorneys differ about whether such a release is wise legal strategy.

In January 2017, a We the People petition demanded that Trump release his tax
returns; the petition broke the White House record for number of signatures
gathered.

On September 26, 2016, Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton faced off in the first
presidential debate at Hofstra University in Hempstead, New York. Lester Holt,
an anchor with NBC News, was the moderator. This was the most watched
presidential debate in United States history. The second presidential debate was
held at Washington University in Saint Louis, Missouri. The beginning narrative
of that debate was dominated by a leaked tape of Trump making lewd comments, and
counter-accusations by Trump of sexual misconduct by Bill Clinton. Trump had
invited four women who had accused Clinton of impropriety to a press conference
prior to the debate. The final presidential debate was held at the University of
Nevada, Las Vegas on October 19. Trump's refusal to say whether or not he would
accept the result of the election, regardless of the outcome, drew particular
press attention.

Media have described Trump's political positions as "populist", and some of his
views cross party lines. For example, his economic campaign plan calls for large
reductions in income taxes and deregulation, consistent with Republican Party
policies, along with significant infrastructure investment, usually considered a
liberal (Democratic Party) policy. According to political writer Jack Shafer,
Trump may be a "fairly conventional American populist when it comes to his
policy views", but he attracts free media attention, sometimes by making
outrageous comments.

Trump has supported or leaned toward varying political positions over time.
Politico has described his positions as "eclectic, improvisational and often
contradictory", while NBC News counted "141 distinct shifts on 23 major issues"
during his campaign.

Several of Trump's top advisers, including Paul Manafort and Michael T. Flynn
who had official positions before Trump replaced them, have had strong ties to
Russia. Ukrainian officials provided evidence that helped to force Manafort's
resignation as campaign manager. American intelligence sources stated with "high
confidence" that the Russian government attempted to intervene in the 2016
presidential election to favor the election of Trump by hacking into computers
of Trumps' opponents, and that members of Trump's campaign were in contact with
Russian government officials both before and after the presidential election.
During the campaign, Trump repeatedly praised Russian president Vladimir Putin
as a strong leader. For these reasons, there has been intensive media scrutiny
of Trump's relationship to Russia.

Trump has said, "I can tell you, speaking for myself, I own nothing in Russia. I
have no loans in Russia. I don't have any deals in Russia." Indeed, as of 2017,
Trump has no known investments or businesses in Russia. Former Director of
National Intelligence James Clapper confirmed in March 2017 that he still
believed Russia intervened in the election to help Trump, but that as of his
January 2017 ODNI report, investigations by the FBI, CIA and NSA had uncovered
no evidence that Trump or his campaign colluded with Russians to influence the
election.

Two days before the second presidential debate, a 2005 recording surfaced, made
on a studio bus while preparing to film an episode of Access Hollywood. On the
tape, Trump is heard bragging to the show's then-cohost Billy Bush about
forcibly kissing and groping women. "I just start kissing them," he says, "I
don't even wait. And when you're a star, they let you do it, you can do
anything ... grab them by the pussy." During the recording, Trump also speaks of
his efforts to seduce a married woman, saying he "moved on her very heavily".
These statements were recorded several months after Trump married his third and
current wife, Melania, who was pregnant at the time.

Trump's language on the tape was described by the media as "vulgar", "sexist",
and descriptive of sexual assault. The incident prompted him to make his first
public apology during the campaign, and caused outrage across the political
spectrum, with many Republicans withdrawing their endorsements of his candidacy
and some urging him to quit the race. A number of Trump supporters worldwide
also withdrew their support following release of the tape, including many
Conservatives in Britain. Subsequently, at least 15 women came forward with new
accusations of sexual misconduct, including unwanted kissing and groping,
resulting in widespread media coverage.

Trump and his campaign have denied all of the sexual misconducting accusations,
which Trump has called "false smears", and alleged a conspiracy against him. In
his two public statements in response to the controversy, Trump responded by
alleging that Bill Clinton, former President of the United States and husband of
Trump's Democratic rival Hillary Clinton, had "abused women" and that Hillary
had bullied her husband's victims.

On Election Day, November 8, 2016, Trump received 306 electoral votes to
Clinton's 232 votes. The counts were later adjusted to 304 and 227 respectively,
after defections on both sides, formalizing Trump's election to the presidency.
In the early hours of November 9, Clinton called Trump to concede the election.
Trump then delivered his victory speech before hundreds of supporters in the New
York Hilton hotel. The speech was in contrast with some of his previous
rhetoric, with Trump promising to heal the division caused by the election,
thanking Clinton for her service to the country, and promising to be a president
to all Americans.

Trump received a smaller share of the popular vote than Clinton, making him the
fifth person to be elected president after losing the popular vote. Records on
this matter date from the year 1824.[nb 1] Clinton finished ahead by 2.86
million votes or 2.1 percentage points, 48.04% to 45.95%, with neither candidate
reaching a majority nationwide.

Trump's victory was considered a stunning political upset, as polls consistently
showed Hillary Clinton leading nationwide and in most battleground states, while
Trump's support had been underestimated throughout his campaign. The errors in
some state polls were later partially attributed to pollsters overestimating
Clinton's support among well-educated and nonwhite voters, while underestimating
Trump's support among white working-class voters. Trump won the perennial swing
states of Florida, Iowa and Ohio, and flipped Clinton's "blue wall" states of
Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, which had been Democratic strongholds
since the 1990s. Trump's victory marked the return of a Republican White House
combined with control both chambers of Congress, as was the case during parts of
George W. Bush's presidency from 2003 to 2007.

Trump became the first president without prior governmental or military
experience. Of the 44 previous presidents, 39 had held prior elective office; 2
had not held elective office but had served in the Cabinet; and 3 had never held
public office but had been commanding generals. He is the first Republican since
the 1980s to win the states of Pennsylvania, Michigan, and Wisconsin. He lost
his home state of New York, becoming only the fourth candidate to win the
presidency without his home state. The others were James Polk (Tennessee) in
1844, Woodrow Wilson (New Jersey) in 1916, and Richard Nixon (New York) in 1968.

Trump's victory sparked protests across the United States. Democrats, in
alignment with other Trump opponents, took to the streets to amplify their
opposition to Trump's views and denounce his inflammatory statements. They
argued that Clinton's popular vote victory meant Trump was not actually the
democratically elected president and should be considered illegitimate. Trump
initially said on Twitter that the protests consisted of "professional
protesters, incited by the media", and were "unfair", but he later stated that
he loves their passion for the country. In contrast, after Obama's re-election
in 2012, Trump had tweeted "We can't let this happen. We should march on
Washington and stop this travesty. Our nation is totally divided!"

On the Saturday following Trump's inauguration there were massive demonstrations
protesting Trump in the United States and worldwide, with approximately
2,600,000 taking place in Women's Marches worldwide. The most notable of these
marches was the Women's March on Washington (in Washington, D.C.), where over
500,000 people marched in opposition to Trump. This was more than three times
the number of people who were at Trump's inaugural speech, according to crowd
scientists at the Manchester Metropolitan University.

On November 10, President-elect Trump had his first ever meeting with President
Obama to discuss plans for a peaceful transition of power. The New York Times
stated that "It was an extraordinary show of cordiality and respect between two
men who have been political enemies and are stylistic opposites." The BBC stated
that "their antipathy was barely concealed" in "awkward photos" of the meeting.

Trump's transition team was led by Chris Christie until November 11, 2016, when
Vice President-elect Mike Pence took over. Since then, Trump has chosen RNC
chairman Reince Priebus as White House Chief of Staff and businessman and media
executive Steve Bannon as Counselor to the President.

He has nominated Senator Jeff Sessions as Attorney General, retired Lieutenant
General Michael Flynn as National Security Advisor, education reform activist
Betsy DeVos as Secretary of Education, Governor Nikki Haley as Ambassador to the
United Nations, former Secretary of Labor Elaine Chao as Secretary of
Transportation, U.S. Representative Tom Price as Secretary of Health and Human
Services, former campaign rival Ben Carson as Secretary of Housing and Urban
Development, financier Steve Mnuchin as Secretary of the Treasury, billionaire
investor Wilbur Ross as Secretary of Commerce, retired Marine Corps General
James Mattis as Secretary of Defense, retired Marine Corps General John F. Kelly
as Secretary of Homeland Security, businessman Andrew Puzder as Secretary of
Labor (later withdrawn, replaced by attorney and law school dean Alexander
Acosta), CEO of ExxonMobil Rex Tillerson as Secretary of State, former Governor
Rick Perry as Secretary of Energy, U.S. Representative Ryan Zinke as Secretary
of the Interior, and Under Secretary for Health David Shulkin as Secretary of
Veterans Affairs.

Despite being nominated promptly during the transition period, many cabinet
members were unable to take office on Inauguration Day because of delays in the
formal confirmation process. By February 8, 2017, President Trump had fewer
cabinet nominees confirmed than any other president except George Washington by
the same length of time into his presidency. Part of the lateness was ascribed
to the delays in submitting background-check paperwork, part to obstructionism
by Senate Democrats.

On November 22, Trump outlined his plan for his first 100 days in office in a
video posted on YouTube. The plan included the United States' withdrawal from
the Trans-Pacific Partnership and asking the Department of Defense to develop a
plan to protect the U.S. from cyber-attack.

On December 7, Time named Trump as its "Person of the Year". In an interview on
The Today Show, he said he was honored by the award, but he took issue with the
magazine for referring to him as the "President of the Divided States of
America". He also opposed Time's decision to change its "Man of the Year" title
to "Person of the Year" in 1999, describing the action as too "politically
correct". On December 13 he was named Financial Times Person of the Year. In
December 2016, Forbes ranked Trump the second most powerful person in the world,
after Vladimir Putin and before Angela Merkel.

Based on intelligence reports issued from October 2016 to January 2017, the
Obama administration accused the Russian government of trying to influence the
U.S. presidential election in favor of Trump, notably by supplying the DNC
emails to WikiLeaks for publication. Both Trump, WikiLeaks and Russian officials
have denied the allegations.

In January 2017, Trump was briefed on a private intelligence dossier containing
"potentially compromising personal and financial information" about his
activities in Russia, which he denied. The dossier was also leaked to the press
and published. Media evaluation of the dossier ranged from "garbage" to
"partially corroborated".

The inauguration of Donald Trump as the 45th President of the United States was
held on Friday, January 20, 2017. In his first week as president, Trump signed
six executive orders. His first order as president stood to minimize "the
economic burden" of the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. That same
week, Trump withdrew the United States from the Trans-Pacific Partnership,
re-instated the Mexico City Policy, reopened the Keystone XL and Dakota Access
pipeline construction projects and launched the process to build a new Mexico
border wall and reinforce border security.

On January 27, President Trump signed an executive order that suspended
admission of refugees for 120 days and denied entry to citizens of Iraq, Iran,
Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, and Yemen for 90 days, citing security concerns
about terrorism. The following day, thousands of protesters gathered at airports
and other locations throughout the United States to protest the signing of the
order and detainment of the foreign nationals. Later, the administration seemed
to reverse a portion of part of the order, effectively exempting visitors with a
green card. Two Iraqi nationals detained upon arrival filed a complaint. Several
federal judges issued rulings that curtailed parts of the immigration order,
stopping the federal government from deporting visitors already affected.

On March 6, 2016, Trump issued a revised executive order, that, among other
differences with the original order, excluded Iraq, visa-holders, and permanent
residents from the temporary suspension and did not differentiate Syrian
refugees from refugees from other countries.

On January 31, Trump nominated U.S. Appeals Court judge Neil Gorsuch to fill the
vacancy left on the Supreme Court by the death of Justice Antonin Scalia.

Trump's energy policy advocates domestic industrial support for both fossil and
renewable energy sources in order to curb reliance on Middle-Eastern oil and
possibly turn the U.S. into a net energy exporter. His appointed advisers favor
a less regulated energy market and, because they do not consider climate change
a threat, see no need for immediate action.

Trump does not accept the scientific consensus on climate change. In 2012, he
said that global warming was a hoax invented by the Chinese, but later said that
he was joking. He has called the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) a
"disgrace" and has threatened to cut its budget. Trump has pledged to eliminate
the Clean Power Plan and withdraw from the Paris Climate Agreement, which calls
for reductions in carbon emissions in more than 170 countries. After winning the
presidency, Trump admitted "some connectivity" between human activity and
climate variability and said he has an "open mind" towards the Paris agreement.

Trump's immigration policies were intensely discussed during the campaign. Trump
vowed to build a more substantial wall on the Mexico–United States border to
keep out illegal immigrants, a wall which Trump promised Mexico would pay for.
He pledged to massively deport illegal immigrants residing in the United States,
and criticized birthright citizenship as it creates "anchor babies". He said the
focus of deportation would be criminals, those who have overstayed their visas,
and other "security threats".

Following the November 2015 Paris attacks, Trump made a controversial proposal
to completely ban Muslim non-citizens from entering the United States until
stronger vetting systems could be implemented. Later in 2016 he stated that the
ban would apply only to people originating from countries with a "proven history
of terrorism against the United States or its allies", or countries "compromised
by terrorism".

In late January 2017, Trump issued an executive order banning the admission of
immigrants from seven predominantly Muslim countries. The order was imposed
without warning and took effective immediately; the measure caused chaos at many
airports. Multiple legal challenges were filed against the order, and a federal
court blocked its implementation. In early March 2017, Trump issued a revised
order into law.

Trump is conservative, describes himself as pro-life and generally opposes
abortion with some exceptions: rape, incest, and circumstances endangering the
health of the mother. He has said that he is committed to appointing justices
who would try to overturn the ruling in Roe v. Wade. He personally supports
"traditional marriage" but considers the nationwide legality of same-sex
marriage a "settled" issue.

Trump supports a broad interpretation of the Second Amendment and says he is
opposed to gun control in general, although his views have shifted over time.
Trump opposes legalizing recreational marijuana but supports legalizing medical
marijuana. He favors capital punishment, as well as the use of waterboarding.

In 1999, Trump told Larry King Live that "I believe in universal healthcare."
Trump's 2000 book, The America We Deserve, argued strongly for a single-payer
healthcare system based on the Canadian model, and has voiced admiration for the
Scottish National Health Service.

However, Trump has repeatedly vowed to repeal and replace Obamacare. In March
2016, Trump's campaign released a platform summary which included a variety of
free-market health reforms including provisions to allow health insurance to be
sold across state lines, enable individuals to deduct health insurance premiums,
expand health savings accounts, and give more control of Medicaid to the states.

Trump aims to streamline the Department of Veterans Affairs, getting rid of
backlogs and waitlists, and upgrading relevant facilities. On his first Monday
in office, Trump issued a federal hiring freeze on the VA.

Trump has stated his support for school choice and local control for primary and
secondary schools. He opposes the Common Core State Standards Initiative for
primary and secondary schools, and has called Common Core "a disaster" that must
be ended. He has stated he would abolish all or part of the Department of
Education.

Trump's campaign tax plan called for levelling the corporate tax rate to 15%,
eliminating various business loopholes and deductions, and reducing the number
of brackets for personal income tax: the top rate would be reduced from 39.6% to
25%, a large "zero bracket" would be created, and the alternative minimum tax
and estate tax (which currently applies to individual estates over $5.45 million
or $10.9 million per married couple) would both be eliminated. His comments
about the minimum wage have been inconsistent.

Trump identifies as a "free trader", but says that trade must be "reasonably
fair". He has often been called a "protectionist", because of his criticism of
NAFTA, the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), and his proposal to raise tariffs on
Chinese and Mexican exports to the United States significantly. He has also been
critical of the World Trade Organization, threatening to leave unless his
proposed tariffs are accepted. However, Trump has been very keen to support a
"fair" post-Brexit trade deal with the United Kingdom, which Trump claims would
be "good for both sides".

Trump has been described as non-interventionist and nationalist. Trump
repeatedly stated that he supports "America First" foreign policy. He supports
increasing United States military defense spending, but favors decreasing United
States spending on NATO and in the Pacific region. He says America should look
inward, stop "nation building", and re-orient its resources toward domestic
needs. As a candidate he questioned whether he, as president, would
automatically extend security guarantees to NATO members, and suggested that he
might leave NATO unless changes are made to the alliance.

In order to confront the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), Trump in 2015
called for seizing the oil in ISIS-occupied areas, using U.S. air power and
ground troops. In 2016, Trump advocated sending 20,000 to 30,000 U.S. troops to
the region, a position he later retracted. Regarding the Israeli–Palestinian
conflict, Trump has stated the importance of being a neutral party during
potential negotiations, while also having stated that he is "a big fan of
Israel". During the campaign he said he would relocate the U.S. embassy in
Israel to Jerusalem from its current location, Tel Aviv, although he has not
pursued that proposal as president.

Trump has considered recognizing Crimea as Russian territory and lifting
sanctions on Russia in the past; however, in the aftermath of Michael T. Flynn's
resignation as National Security Adviser, White House Press Secretary Sean
Spicer said that Trump expects Russia to "return" Crimea to Ukraine,
emphatically stating that "Crimea is a part of Ukraine. Our Crimea-related
sanctions will remain in place until Russia returns control of the peninsula to
Ukraine". He added that Trump's appointed ambassador to the United Nations,
Nikki Haley, "strongly denounced the Russian occupation" of Crimea. Trump has
pledged to hold a summit meeting with Vladimir Putin. He added that Russia could
help the U.S. in fighting ISIS militants.

Trump signaled his intent to run for a second term by filing with the FEC within
hours of assuming the presidency. This transformed his 2016 election committee
into a 2020 reelection one. The early timing of the beginning of the campaign
was highly unorthodox. Trump marked the official start of the campaign with a
campaign rally in Melbourne, Florida on February 18, 2017, less than a month
after taking office. By February 1, 2017, the campaign had already raised over
$7 million.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2016_in_film

2016 in film is an overview of events, including the highest-grossing films,
award ceremonies, festivals, and a list of films released and deaths.

Captain America: Civil War, Rogue One, Finding Dory, and Zootopia grossed more
than $1 billion each, making them the 25th, 28th, 27th, and 26th films,
respectively, to reach the billion dollar mark and the 12th, 20th, 23rd, and
26th highest-grossing films of all time; the latter two are also the fifth and
fourth animated films, respectively, to reach the mark following Toy Story 3
(2010), Frozen (2013), and Minions (2015). Finding Dory became the second Pixar
film (after Toy Story 3) to earn over $1 billion, while Zootopia became the
second Walt Disney Animation Studios film (after Frozen) and the second original
film (after Avatar) to reach the mark, as the fourth and fifth highest-grossing
animated films of all time; this marks the first time that two animated films
grossed over $1 billion in a single year.

Three other films (The Jungle Book, The Secret Life of Pets, and Batman v
Superman: Dawn of Justice) are also among the 50 highest-grossing films of all
time, with the middle as the twelfth highest-grossing animated film of all time.

Captain America: Civil War, Zootopia, Kung Fu Panda 3, Warcraft, and The Great
Wall have all grossed more than ¥1 billion at the Chinese box office, making
them the 21st, 19th, 20th, 22nd, and 25th films, respectively, to reach the ¥1
billion mark, and the 15th, 7th, 22nd, 8th, and 19th highest-grossing films in
China. Civil War became the second superhero film (after Avengers: Age of
Ultron) and the ninth American film; Zootopia became the first animated film and
seventh American film (third highest after Furious 7 and Transformers: Age of
Extinction, with ¥1.53 billion); Kung Fu Panda 3 became the second animated film
and eighth American film; Warcraft became the first video game adaptation, the
tenth American film, and the fastest film to hit the milestone (114 hours); and
The Great Wall became the eleventh American film.

List of some of the film festivals for 2016 that have been accredited by the
International Federation of Film Producers Associations (FIAPF).



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2016_Wimbledon_Championships

The 2016 Wimbledon Championships was a Grand Slam tennis tournament which took
place at All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club in Wimbledon, London, United
Kingdom. The main draw commenced on 27 June 2016 and concluded on 10 July 2016.

2016 was the 130th edition of the championships, the 49th in the Open Era and
the third Grand Slam tournament of the year. It was played on grass courts and
was part of the ATP World Tour, the WTA Tour, the ITF Junior tour and the NEC
Tour. The tournament was organised by All England Lawn Tennis Club and
International Tennis Federation.

Novak Djokovic was the two-time defending champion in the Gentlemen's Singles,
but he lost in the third round to Sam Querrey, ending a 30-match winning streak
in Grand Slams and Djokovic's hopes of becoming the first man to achieve the
golden calendar slam. The Gentlemen's Singles title was won by Andy Murray.
Serena Williams successfully defended her Ladies' Singles title and equaled
Steffi Graf's Open Era record of 22 major singles titles.

The Gentleman's Doubles event consisted of 'best of three sets' matches for
Rounds 1 and 2 in order to help with 'catch-up' scheduling due to a rain
stricken first week. It was also the first time since 2004 that play took place
on Middle Sunday, also known as the People's Sunday due to the fact that no
tickets are sold in advance or through the ballot and all seats are made
available on general sale the day before. For the first time in the
championships' history singles events were held in the wheelchair competitions.

Australian Lleyton Hewitt, the 2002 Men's Singles champion, two-time Grand Slam
champion and former world No. 1, played his last professional matches in Men's
doubles before retirement.

The 2016 Wimbledon Championships is the 130th edition of the tournament and is
held at All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club in London.

The tournament was run by the International Tennis Federation (ITF) and is
included in the 2016 ATP World Tour and the 2016 WTA Tour calendars under the
Grand Slam category. The tournament consisted of men's (singles and doubles),
women's (singles and doubles), mixed doubles, boys (under 18 – singles and
doubles) and girls (under 18 – singles and doubles), which is also a part of the
Grade A category of tournaments for under 18, doubles events for men's and
women's wheelchair tennis players as part of the UNIQLO Tour under the Grand
Slam category and for the first time in the tournament history this year will be
men's and women's single events for wheelchair tennis players. The tournament is
played only on grass courts; main draw matches were played at the All England
Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club, Wimbledon; qualifying matches were played at the
Bank of England Sports Ground, Roehampton.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iceland

Iceland (i/ˈaɪslənd/; Icelandic: Ísland pronounced: [ˈistlant]), is a Nordic
island country in the North Atlantic Ocean. It has a population of 332,529 and
an area of 103,000 km2 (40,000 sq mi), making it the most sparsely populated
country in Europe. The capital and largest city is Reykjavík. Reykjavík and the
surrounding areas in the southwest of the country are home to over two-thirds of
the population. Iceland is volcanically and geologically active. The interior
consists of a plateau characterised by sand and lava fields, mountains and
glaciers, while many glacial rivers flow to the sea through the lowlands.
Iceland is warmed by the Gulf Stream and has a temperate climate, despite a high
latitude just outside the Arctic Circle. Its high latitude and marine influence
still keeps summers chilly, with most of the archipelago having a tundra
climate.

According to Landnámabók, the settlement of Iceland began in the year 874 AD
when the Norwegian chieftain Ingólfr Arnarson became the first permanent settler
on the island. In the following centuries, Norwegians, and to a lesser extent
other Scandinavians, immigrated to Iceland, bringing with them thralls of Gaelic
origin. The island was governed as an independent commonwealth under the
Althing, one of the world's oldest functioning legislative assemblies. Following
a period of civil strife, Iceland acceded to Norwegian rule in the 13th century.
The establishment of the Kalmar Union in 1397 united the kingdoms of Norway,
Denmark and Sweden. Iceland thus followed Norway's integration to that Union and
came under Danish rule after Sweden's secession from that union in 1523.
Although the Danish kingdom introduced Lutheranism forcefully in 1550, Iceland
remained a distant semi-colonial territory in which Danish institutions and
infrastructures were conspicuous by their absence. In the wake of the French
revolution and the Napoleonic wars, Iceland's struggle for independence took
form and culminated in independence in 1918 and the founding of a republic in
1944. Until the 20th century, Iceland relied largely on subsistence fishing and
agriculture, and was among the poorest in Europe. Industrialisation of the
fisheries and Marshall Plan aid following World War II brought prosperity, and
Iceland became one of the wealthiest and most developed nations in the world. In
1994, it became a part of the European Economic Area, which further diversified
the economy into sectors such as finance, biotechnology, and manufacturing.

Iceland has a market economy with relatively low taxes compared to other OECD
countries. It maintains a Nordic social welfare system that provides universal
health care and tertiary education for its citizens. Iceland ranks high in
economic, political and social stability and equality. In 2013, it was ranked as
the 13th most-developed country in the world by the United Nations' Human
Development Index. Iceland runs almost completely on renewable energy. Affected
by the ongoing worldwide financial crisis, the nation's entire banking system
systemically failed in October 2008, leading to a severe depression, substantial
political unrest, the Icesave dispute, and the institution of capital controls.
Many bankers were jailed, and the economy has made a significant recovery, in
large part due to a surge in tourism.

Icelandic culture is founded upon the nation's Scandinavian heritage. Most
Icelanders are descendants of Germanic and Gaelic settlers. Icelandic, a North
Germanic language, is descended from Old Norse and is closely related to Faroese
and West Norwegian dialects. The country's cultural heritage includes
traditional Icelandic cuisine, Icelandic literature and medieval sagas. Iceland
has the smallest population of any NATO member and is the only one with no
standing army, its lightly armed coast guard being in charge of defence.

According to both Landnámabók and Íslendingabók, Celtic monks known as the Papar
lived in Iceland before Scandinavian settlers arrived, possibly members of a
Hiberno-Scottish mission. Recent archaeological excavations have revealed the
ruins of a cabin in Hafnir on the Reykjanes peninsula. Carbon dating indicates
that it was abandoned sometime between 770 and 880. In 2016, archeologists
uncovered a longhouse in Stöðvarfjörður that has been dated to as early as the
year 800.

Swedish Viking explorer Garðar Svavarsson was the first to circumnavigate
Iceland in 870 and establish that it was an island. He stayed over winter and
built a house in Húsavík. Garðar departed the following summer but one of his
men, Náttfari, decided to stay behind with two slaves. Náttfari settled in what
is now known as Náttfaravík and he and his slaves became the first permanent
residents of Iceland.

The Norwegian-Norse chieftain Ingólfr Arnarson built his homestead in
present-day Reykjavík in the year 874. Ingólfr was followed by many other
emigrant settlers, largely Scandinavians and their thralls, many of whom were
Irish or Scottish. By 930, most arable land on the island had been claimed; the
Althing, a legislative and judicial assembly, was initiated to regulate the
Icelandic Commonwealth. Lack of arable land also served impetus to the
settlement of Greenland starting in 986. The period of these early settlements
coincided with the Medieval Warm Period, when temperatures were similar to those
of the early 20th century. At this time, about 25% of Iceland was covered with
forest, compared to 1% in the present day. Christianity was adopted by consensus
around 999–1000, although Norse paganism persisted among some segments of the
population for some years afterwards.[citation needed]

The Icelandic Commonwealth lasted until the 13th century, when the political
system devised by the original settlers proved unable to cope with the
increasing power of Icelandic chieftains. The internal struggles and civil
strife of the Age of the Sturlungs led to the signing of the Old Covenant in
1262, which ended the Commonwealth and brought Iceland under the Norwegian
crown. Possession of Iceland passed from the Norwegian Empire to the Kalmar
Union in 1415, when the kingdoms of Norway, Denmark and Sweden were united.
After the break-up of the union in 1523, it remained a Norwegian dependency, as
a part of Denmark–Norway.

In the ensuing centuries, Iceland became one of the poorest countries in Europe.
Infertile soil, volcanic eruptions, deforestation and an unforgiving climate
made for harsh life in a society where subsistence depended almost entirely on
agriculture. The Black Death swept Iceland twice, first in 1402–1404 and again
in 1494–1495. The former outbreak killed 50% to 60% of the population, and the
latter 30% to 50%.

Around the middle of the 16th century, as part of the Protestant Reformation,
King Christian III of Denmark began to impose Lutheranism on all his subjects.
Jón Arason, the last Catholic bishop of Hólar, was beheaded in 1550 along with
two of his sons. The country subsequently became officially Lutheran and
Lutheranism has since remained the dominant religion.

In the 17th and 18th centuries, Denmark imposed harsh trade restrictions on
Iceland. Natural disasters, including volcanic eruption and disease, contributed
to a decreasing population. Pirates from several countries, including the
Barbary Coast, raided its coastal settlements and abducted people into slavery.
A great smallpox epidemic in the 18th century killed around a third of the
population. In 1783 the Laki volcano erupted, with devastating effects. In the
years following the eruption, known as the Mist Hardships (Icelandic:
Móðuharðindin), over half of all livestock died in the country. Around a quarter
of the population died in the ensuing famine.

In 1814, following the Napoleonic Wars, Denmark-Norway was broken up into two
separate kingdoms via the Treaty of Kiel but Iceland remained a Danish
dependency. Throughout the 19th century, the country's climate continued to grow
colder, resulting in mass emigration to the New World, particularly to the
region of Gimli, Manitoba in Canada, which was sometimes referred to as New
Iceland. About 15,000 people emigrated, out of a total population of 70,000.

A national consciousness arose in the first half of the 19th century, inspired
by romantic and nationalist ideas from mainland Europe. An Icelandic
independence movement took shape in the 1850s under the leadership of Jón
Sigurðsson, based on the burgeoning Icelandic nationalism inspired by the
Fjölnismenn and other Danish-educated Icelandic intellectuals. In 1874, Denmark
granted Iceland a constitution and limited home rule. This was expanded in 1904,
and Hannes Hafstein served as the first Minister for Iceland in the Danish
cabinet.

The Danish–Icelandic Act of Union, an agreement with Denmark signed on 1
December 1918 and valid for 25 years, recognised Iceland as a fully sovereign
state in a personal union with Denmark. The Government of Iceland established an
embassy in Copenhagen and requested that Denmark handle Icelandic foreign
policy. Danish embassies around the world displayed two coats of arms and two
flags: those of the Kingdom of Denmark and those of the Kingdom of Iceland.

During World War II, Iceland joined Denmark in asserting neutrality. After the
German occupation of Denmark on 9 April 1940, the Althing replaced the King with
a regent and declared that the Icelandic government would take control of
foreign affairs and other matters previously handled by Denmark. A month later,
British armed forces invaded and occupied the country, violating Icelandic
neutrality. In 1941, the occupation was taken over by the United States so that
Britain could use its troops elsewhere.

On 31 December 1943, the Danish–Icelandic Act of Union expired after 25 years.
Beginning on 20 May 1944, Icelanders voted in a four-day plebiscite on whether
to terminate the personal union with Denmark, abolish the monarchy, and
establish a republic. The vote was 97% to end the union, and 95% in favour of
the new republican constitution. Iceland formally became a republic on 17 June
1944, with Sveinn Björnsson as its first president.

In 1946, the Allied occupation force left Iceland. The nation formally became a
member of NATO on 30 March 1949, amid domestic controversy and riots. On 5 May
1951, a defence agreement was signed with the United States. American troops
returned to Iceland as the Iceland Defence Force, and remained throughout the
Cold War. The US withdrew the last of its forces on 30 September 2006.

Iceland had prospered during the war. The immediate post-war period was followed
by substantial economic growth, driven by industrialisation of the fishing
industry and the US Marshall Plan programme, through which Icelanders received
the most aid per capita of any European country (at USD 209, with the
war-ravaged Netherlands a distant second at USD 109).

The 1970s were marked by the Cod Wars — several disputes with the United Kingdom
over Iceland's extension of its fishing limits to 200 miles offshore. Iceland
hosted a summit in Reykjavík in 1986 between United States President Ronald
Reagan and Soviet Premier Mikhail Gorbachev, during which they took significant
steps toward nuclear disarmament. A few years later, Iceland became the first
country to recognize the independence of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania as they
broke away from the USSR. Throughout the 1990s, the country expanded its
international role and developed a foreign policy oriented toward humanitarian
and peacekeeping causes. To that end, Iceland provided aid and expertise to
various NATO-led interventions in Bosnia, Kosovo, and Iraq.

Iceland joined the European Economic Area in 1994, after which the economy was
greatly diversified and liberalised. International economic relations increased
further after 2001, when Iceland's newly deregulated banks began to raise
massive amounts of external debt, contributing to a 32% increase in Iceland's
gross national income between 2002 and 2007.

In the years 2003–2007, following the privatization of the banking sector under
the government of Davíð Oddsson, Iceland moved toward having an economy based on
international investment banking and financial services. It was quickly becoming
one of the most prosperous countries in the world but was hit hard by a major
financial crisis. The crisis resulted in the greatest migration from Iceland
since 1887, with a net emigration of 5,000 people in 2009. Iceland's economy
stabilised under the government of Jóhanna Sigurðardóttir, and grew by 1.6% in
2012. Many Icelanders, however, have remained unhappy with the state of the
economy and government austerity policies. The centre-right Independence Party
was returned to power in coalition with the Progressive Party in the 2013
elections.

Iceland is at the juncture of the North Atlantic and Arctic Oceans. The main
island is entirely south of the Arctic Circle, which passes through the small
Icelandic island of Grímsey off the main island's northern coast. The country
lies between latitudes 63 and 68°N, and longitudes 25 and 13°W.

Iceland is closer to continental Europe than to mainland North America; thus,
the island is generally included in Europe for historical, political, cultural,
and practical reasons. Geologically, the island includes parts of both
continental plates. The closest body of land is Greenland (290 km, 180 mi). The
closest bodies of land in Europe are the Faroe Islands (420 km, 260 mi); Jan
Mayen Island (570 km, 350 mi); Shetland and the Outer Hebrides, both about
740 km (460 mi); and the Scottish mainland and Orkney, both about 750 km
(470 mi). The mainland of Norway is about 970 km (600 mi) away.

Iceland is the world's 18th largest island, and Europe's second-largest island
after Great Britain. The main island is 101,826 km2 (39,315 sq mi), but the
entire country is 103,000 km2 (39,768.5 sq mi) in size, of which 62.7% is
tundra. About 30 minor islands are in Iceland, including the lightly populated
Grímsey and the Vestmannaeyjar archipelago. Lakes and glaciers cover 14.3% of
its surface; only 23% is vegetated. The largest lakes are Þórisvatn reservoir:
83–88 km2 (32–34 sq mi) and Þingvallavatn: 82 km2 (32 sq mi); other important
lakes include Lagarfljót and Mývatn. Jökulsárlón is the deepest lake, at 248 m
(814 ft).

Geologically, Iceland is part of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, a ridge along which the
oceanic crust spreads and forms new oceanic crust. This part of the mid-ocean
ridge is located above a mantle plume, causing Iceland to be subaerial (above
the surface of the sea). The ridge marks the boundary between the Eurasian and
North American Plates, and Iceland was created by rifting and accretion through
volcanism along the ridge.

Many fjords punctuate Iceland's 4,970-km-long (3,088-mi) coastline, which is
also where most settlements are situated. The island's interior, the Highlands
of Iceland, is a cold and uninhabitable combination of sand, mountains, and lava
fields. The major towns are the capital city of Reykjavík, along with its
outlying towns of Kópavogur, Hafnarfjörður, and Garðabær, nearby Reykjanesbær
where the international airport is located, and the town of Akureyri in northern
Iceland. The island of Grímsey on the Arctic Circle contains the northernmost
habitation of Iceland, whereas Kolbeinsey contains the northernmost point of
Iceland. Iceland has three national parks: Vatnajökull National Park,
Snæfellsjökull National Park, and Þingvellir National Park. The country is
considered a "strong performer" in environmental protection, having been ranked
13th in Yale University's Environmental Performance Index of 2012.

A geologically young land, Iceland is located on both the Iceland hotspot and
the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, which runs right through it. This location means that
the island is highly geologically active with many volcanoes, notably Hekla,
Eldgjá, Herðubreið, and Eldfell. The volcanic eruption of Laki in 1783–1784
caused a famine that killed nearly a quarter of the island's population. In
addition, the eruption caused dust clouds and haze to appear over most of Europe
and parts of Asia and Africa for several months afterward, and affected climates
in other areas.

Iceland has many geysers, including Geysir, from which the English word is
derived, and the famous Strokkur, which erupts every 8–10 minutes. After a phase
of inactivity, Geysir started erupting again after a series of earthquakes in
2000. Geysir has since grown quieter and does not erupt often.

With the widespread availability of geothermal power, and the harnessing of many
rivers and waterfalls for hydroelectricity, most residents have access to
inexpensive hot water, heating, and electricity. The island is composed
primarily of basalt, a low-silica lava associated with effusive volcanism as has
occurred also in Hawaii. Iceland, however, has a variety of volcanic types
(composite and fissure), many producing more evolved lavas such as rhyolite and
andesite. Iceland has hundreds of volcanoes with about 30 active volcanic
systems.

Surtsey, one of the youngest islands in the world, is part of Iceland. Named
after Surtr, it rose above the ocean in a series of volcanic eruptions between 8
November 1963 and 5 June 1968. Only scientists researching the growth of new
life are allowed to visit the island.

On 21 March 2010, a volcano in Eyjafjallajökull in the south of Iceland erupted
for the first time since 1821, forcing 600 people to flee their homes.
Additional eruptions on 14 April forced hundreds of people to abandon their
homes. The resultant cloud of volcanic ash brought major disruption to air
travel across Europe.

Another large eruption occurred on 21 May 2011. This time it was the Grímsvötn
volcano, located under the thick ice of Europe's largest glacier, Vatnajökull.
Grímsvötn is one of Iceland's most active volcanoes, and this eruption was much
more powerful than the 2010 Eyjafjallajökull activity, with ash and lava hurled
20 km (12 mi) into the atmosphere, creating a large cloud.

The climate of Iceland's coast is subarctic. The warm North Atlantic Current
ensures generally higher annual temperatures than in most places of similar
latitude in the world. Regions in the world with similar climates include the
Aleutian Islands, the Alaska Peninsula, and Tierra del Fuego, although these
regions are closer to the equator. Despite its proximity to the Arctic, the
island's coasts remain ice-free through the winter. Ice incursions are rare, the
last having occurred on the north coast in 1969.

Around 1,300 species of insects are known in Iceland, which is low compared with
other countries (over one million species have been described worldwide). The
only native land mammal when humans arrived was the Arctic fox, which came to
the island at the end of the ice age, walking over the frozen sea. On rare
occasions, bats have been carried to the island with the winds, but they are not
able to breed there. Polar bears occasionally come over from Greenland, but they
are just visitors, and no Icelandic populations exist. No native or free-living
reptiles or amphibians are on the island.

Phytogeographically, Iceland belongs to the Arctic province of the Circumboreal
Region within the Boreal Kingdom. Around three-quarters of the island is barren
of vegetation; plant life consists mainly of grassland, which is regularly
grazed by livestock. The most common tree native to Iceland is the northern
birch (Betula pubescens), which formerly formed forests over much of Iceland,
along with aspens (Populus tremula), rowans (Sorbus aucuparia), common junipers
(Juniperus communis), and other smaller trees, mainly willows.

When the island was first settled, it was extensively forested. In the late 12th
century, Ari the Wise described it in the Íslendingabók as "forested from
mountain to sea shore". Permanent human settlement greatly disturbed the
isolated ecosystem of thin, volcanic soils and limited species diversity. The
forests were heavily exploited over the centuries for firewood and timber.
Deforestation, climatic deterioration during the Little Ice Age, and overgrazing
by sheep imported by settlers caused a loss of critical topsoil due to erosion.
Today, many farms have been abandoned. Three-quarters of Iceland's 100,000
square kilometres is affected by soil erosion 18,000 km2 (6,900 sq mi), serious
enough to make the land useless. Only a few small birch stands now exist in
isolated reserves. The planting of new forests has increased the number of
trees, but the result does not compare to the original forests. Some of the
planted forests include introduced species. The tallest tree in Iceland is a
sitka spruce planted in 1949 in Kirkjubæjarklaustur; it was measured at 25.2 m
(83 ft) in 2013.

The animals of Iceland include the Icelandic sheep, cattle, chickens, goats, the
sturdy Icelandic horse, and the Icelandic Sheepdog, all descendants of animals
imported by Europeans. Wild mammals include the Arctic fox, mink, mice, rats,
rabbits, and reindeer. Polar bears occasionally visit the island, travelling on
icebergs from Greenland. In June 2008, two polar bears arrived in the same
month. Marine mammals include the grey seal (Halichoerus grypus) and harbor seal
(Phoca vitulina). Many species of fish live in the ocean waters surrounding
Iceland, and the fishing industry is a major part of Iceland's economy,
accounting for roughly half of the country's total exports. Birds, especially
seabirds, are an important part of Iceland's animal life. Puffins, skuas, and
kittiwakes nest on its sea cliffs.

Commercial whaling is practised intermittently along with scientific whale
hunts. Whale watching has become an important part of Iceland's economy since
1997.

Iceland has a left–right multi-party system. Following the 2013 parliamentary
election, the biggest parties are the centre-right Independence Party
(Sjálfstæðisflokkurinn) and the Progressive Party (Framsóknarflokkurinn). Other
political parties with seats in the Althing are the centre-left Social
Democratic Alliance (Samfylkingin), Left-Green Movement (Vinstrihreyfingin –
grænt framboð), Bright Future (Björt framtíð), and the Pirate Party of Iceland
(Píratar). Many other parties exist on the municipal level, most of which run
only locally in a single municipality.

Iceland was the first country in the world to have a political party formed and
led entirely by women. Known as the Women's List or Women's Alliance
(Kvennalistinn), it was founded in 1983 to advance the political, economic, and
social needs of women. After participating in its first parliamentary elections,
the Women's List helped increase the proportion of female parliamentarians by
15%. Although it disbanded in 1999, merging with the Social Democratic Alliance,
it left a lasting influence on Iceland's politics: every major party has a 40%
quota for women, and in 2009 nearly a third of members of parliament were
female, compared to the global average of 16%.

In 2016 Iceland was ranked 2nd in the strength of its democratic institutions
and 13th in government transparency. The country has a high level of civic
participation, with 81.4% voter turnout during the most recent elections,
compared to an OECD average of 72%. However, only 50% of Icelanders say they
trust their political institutions, slightly less than the OECD average of 56%
(and most probably a consequence of the political scandals in the wake of the
Icelandic financial crisis).

Iceland is a representative democracy and a parliamentary republic. The modern
parliament, Alþingi (English: Althing), was founded in 1845 as an advisory body
to the Danish monarch. It was widely seen as a re-establishment of the assembly
founded in 930 in the Commonwealth period and suspended in 1799. Consequently,
"it is arguably the world's oldest parliamentary democracy." It currently has 63
members, elected for a maximum period of four years. The president is elected by
popular vote for a term of four years, with no term limit. The elections for
president, the Althing and local municipal councils are all held separately
every four years.

The president of Iceland is a largely ceremonial head of state and serves as a
diplomat, but may veto laws voted by the parliament and put them to a national
referendum. The current president is Guðni Th. Jóhannesson. The head of
government is the prime minister who, together with the cabinet, is responsible
for executive government. The cabinet is appointed by the president after a
general election to the Althing; however, the appointment is usually negotiated
by the leaders of the political parties, who decide among themselves after
discussions which parties can form the cabinet and how to distribute its seats,
under the condition that it has a majority support in the Althing. Only when the
party leaders are unable to reach a conclusion by themselves within a reasonable
time span does the president exercise this power and appoint the cabinet
personally. This has not happened since the republic was founded in 1944, but in
1942 regent Sveinn Björnsson, who had been installed in that position by the
Althing in 1941, appointed a non-parliamentary government. The regent had, for
all practical purposes, the position of a president, and Sveinn would later
become the country's first president in 1944.

The governments of Iceland have always been coalition governments, with two or
more parties involved, as no single political party has ever received a majority
of seats in the Althing throughout the republican period. The extent of the
political power possessed by the office of the president is disputed by legal
scholars[which?], in Iceland; several provisions of the constitution appear to
give the president some important powers, but other provisions and traditions
suggest differently.[citation needed] In 1980, Icelanders elected Vigdís
Finnbogadóttir as president, the world's first directly elected female head of
state. She retired from office in 1996. In 2009, Iceland became the first
country with an openly gay head of government when Jóhanna Sigurðardóttir became
prime minister.

Iceland is divided into regions, constituencies and municipalities. The eight
regions are primarily used for statistical purposes. District court
jurisdictions also use an older version of this division. Until 2003, the
constituencies for the parliamentary elections were the same as the regions, but
by an amendment to the constitution, they were changed to the current six
constituencies:

The redistricting change was made to balance the weight of different districts
of the country, since previously a vote cast in the sparsely populated areas
around the country would count much more than a vote cast in the Reykjavík city
area. The imbalance between districts has been reduced by the new system, but
still exists.

74 municipalities in Iceland govern local matters like schools, transport, and
zoning. These are the actual second-level subdivisions of Iceland, as the
constituencies have no relevance except in elections and for statistical
purposes. Reykjavík is by far the most populous municipality, about four times
more populous than Kópavogur, the second one.

Iceland, which is a member of the UN, NATO, EFTA, Council of Europe and OECD,
maintains diplomatic and commercial relations with practically all nations, but
its ties with the Nordic countries, Germany, the United States, Canada and the
other NATO nations are particularly close. Historically, due to cultural,
economic and linguistic similarities, Iceland is a Nordic country, and it
participates in intergovernmental cooperation through the Nordic Council.

Iceland is a member of the European Economic Area (EEA), which allows the
country access to the single market of the European Union (EU). It was not a
member of the EU, but in July 2009 the Icelandic parliament, the Althing, voted
in favour of application for EU membership and officially applied on 17 July
2009. However, in 2013, opinion polls showed that many Icelanders were now
against joining the EU; following 2013 elections the two parties that formed the
island's new government – the centrist Progressive Party and the right-wing
Independence Party – announced they would hold a referendum on EU membership.

Iceland has no standing army, but the Icelandic Coast Guard which also maintains
the Iceland Air Defence System, and a Iceland Crisis Response Unit to support
peacekeeping missions, perform para-military functions.

The Iceland Defense Force (IDF) was a military command of the United States
Armed Forces from 1951 to 2006. The IDF, created at the request of NATO, came
into existence when the United States signed an agreement to provide for the
defense of Iceland. The IDF also consisted of civilian Icelanders and military
members of other NATO nations. The IDF was downsized after the end of the Cold
War and the U.S. Air Force maintained four to six interceptor aircraft at the
Naval Air Station Keflavik, until they were withdrawn on 30 September 2006.
Since May 2008, NATO nations have periodically deployed fighters to patrol
Icelandic airspace under the Icelandic Air Policing mission. Iceland supported
the 2003 invasion of Iraq despite much domestic controversy, deploying a Coast
Guard EOD team to Iraq, which was replaced later by members of the Iceland
Crisis Response Unit. Iceland has also participated in the ongoing conflict in
Afghanistan and the 1999 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia. Despite the ongoing
financial crisis the first new patrol ship in decades was launched on 29 April
2009.

Icelanders remain especially proud of their role in hosting the historic 1986
Reagan–Gorbachev summit in Reykjavík[citation needed], which set the stage for
the end of the Cold War. Iceland's principal historical international disputes
involved disagreements over fishing rights[citation needed]. Conflict with the
United Kingdom led to a series of so-called Cod Wars, which included
confrontations between the Icelandic Coast Guard and the Royal Navy over British
fishermen, in 1952–1956 due to the extension of Iceland's fishing zone from 3 to
4 nmi (5.6 to 7.4 km; 3.5 to 4.6 mi), 1958–1961 following a further extension to
12 nmi (22.2 km; 13.8 mi), 1972–1973 with another extension to 50 nmi (92.6 km;
57.5 mi); and in 1975–1976 another extension to 200 nmi (370.4 km;
230.2 mi)[citation needed].

According to the Global Peace Index, Iceland is the most peaceful country in the
world, due to its lack of armed forces, low crime rate, and high level of
socio-political stability. Iceland is listed in Guinness Records Book as
"Country ranked most at peace" and "Lowest military spending per capita"

In 2007, Iceland was the seventh most productive country in the world per capita
(US$54,858), and the fifth most productive by GDP at purchasing power parity
($40,112). About 85 percent of total primary energy supply in Iceland is derived
from domestically produced renewable energy sources. Utilization of abundant
hydroelectric and geothermal power has made Iceland the world's largest
electricity producer per capita. As a result of its commitment to renewable
energy, the 2016 Global Green Economy Index ranked Iceland among the top 10
greenest economies in the world. Historically, Iceland's economy depended
heavily on fishing, which still provides 40% of export earnings and employs 7%
of the work force. The economy is vulnerable to declining fish stocks and drops
in world prices for its main material exports: fish and fish products,
aluminium, and ferrosilicon. Whaling in Iceland has been historically
significant. Iceland still relies heavily on fishing, but its importance is
diminishing from an export share of 90% in the 1960s to 40% in 2006.

Until the 20th century, Iceland was among the poorest countries in Europe.
Currently, it remains one of the most developed countries in the world. Strong
economic growth had led Iceland to be ranked first in the United Nations' Human
Development Index report for 2007/2008, although in 2011 its HDI rating had
fallen to 14th place as a result of the economic crisis. Nevertheless, according
to the Economist Intelligence Index of 2011, Iceland has the 2nd highest quality
of life in the world. Based on the Gini coefficient, Iceland also has one of the
lowest rates of income inequality in the world, and when adjusted for
inequality, its HDI ranking climbs to 5th place. Iceland's unemployment rate has
declined consistently since the crisis, with 4.8% of the labour force being
unemployed as of June 2012, compared to 6% in 2011 and 8.1% in 2010.

Many political parties remain opposed to EU membership, primarily due to
Icelanders' concern about losing control over their natural resources
(particularly fisheries). The national currency of Iceland is the Icelandic
króna (ISK). Nearly 70% of Icelanders have favoured the adoption of the Canadian
dollar (CAD) – more than any other currency in the world.

A poll released on 5 March 2010 by Capacent Gallup showed that 31% of
respondents were in favour of adopting the euro and 69% opposed. Another
Capacent Gallup poll conducted in February 2012 found that 67.4% of Icelanders
would reject EU membership in a referendum.

Iceland's economy has been diversifying into manufacturing and service
industries in the last decade, including software production, biotechnology, and
finance; industry accounts for around a quarter of economic activity, while
services comprise close to 70%. The tourism sector is expanding, especially in
ecotourism and whale-watching. On average, Iceland receives around 1.1 million
visitors annually, which is more than three times the native population.
Iceland's agriculture industry, accounting for 5.4% of GDP, consists mainly of
potatoes, green vegetables (in greenhouses), mutton and dairy products. The
financial centre is Borgartún in Reykjavík, which hosts a large number of
companies and three investment banks. Iceland's stock market, the Iceland Stock
Exchange (ISE), was established in 1985.

Iceland is ranked 27th in the 2012 Index of Economic Freedom, lower than in
prior years but still among the freest in the world. As of 2016[update], it
ranks 29th in the World Economic Forum's Global Competitive Index, one place
lower than in 2015. According to INSEAD's Global Innovation Index, Iceland is
the 11th most innovative country in the world. Unlike most Western European
countries, Iceland has a flat tax system: the main personal income tax rate is a
flat 22.75%, and combined with municipal taxes, the total tax rate equals no
more than 35.7%, not including the many deductions that are available. The
corporate tax rate is a flat 18%, one of the lowest in the world. There is also
a value added tax, whereas a net wealth tax was eliminated in 2006. Employment
regulations are relatively flexible and the labour market is one of the freest
in the world. Property rights are strong and Iceland is one of the few countries
where they are applied to fishery management. Like other welfare states,
taxpayers pay various subsidies to each other, but with spending being less than
in most European countries.

Despite low tax rates, agricultural assistance is the highest among OECD
countries and a potential impediment to structural change. Also, health care and
education spending have relatively poor returns by OECD measures, though
improvements have been made in both areas. The OECD Economic Survey of Iceland
2008 had highlighted Iceland's challenges in currency and macroeconomic policy.
There was a currency crisis that started in the spring of 2008, and on 6 October
trading in Iceland's banks was suspended as the government battled to save the
economy. The latest assessment by the OECD determined that Iceland has made
progress in many areas, particularly in creating a sustainable fiscal policy and
restoring the health of the financial sector; however, challenges remain in
making the fishing industry more efficient and sustainable, as well as in
improving monetary policy to address inflation. Iceland's public debt has
decreased since the economic crisis, and as of 2015[update] is the 31th highest
in the world by proportion of national GDP.

Iceland had been hit especially hard by the Great Recession that began in
December 2007, because of the failure of its banking system and a subsequent
economic crisis. Before the crash of the country's three largest banks, Glitnir,
Landsbanki and Kaupthing, their combined debt exceeded approximately six times
the nation's gross domestic product of €14 billion ($19 billion). In October
2008, the Icelandic parliament passed emergency legislation to minimise the
impact of the Financial crisis. The Financial Supervisory Authority of Iceland
used permission granted by the emergency legislation to take over the domestic
operations of the three largest banks. Icelandic officials, including central
bank governor Davíð Oddsson, stated that the state did not intend to take over
any of the banks' foreign debts or assets. Instead, new banks were established
to take on the domestic operations of the banks, and the old banks will be run
into bankruptcy.

On 28 October 2008, the Icelandic government raised interest rates to 18% (as of
August 2010, it was 7%), a move forced in part by the terms of acquiring a loan
from International Monetary Fund (IMF). After the rate hike, trading on the
Icelandic króna finally resumed on the open market, with valuation at around 250
ISK per Euro, less than one-third the value of the 1:70 exchange rate during
most of 2008, and a significant drop from the 1:150 exchange ratio of the week
before. On 20 November 2008, the Nordic countries agreed to lend Iceland
$2.5 billion.

On 26 January 2009, the coalition government collapsed due to the public dissent
over the handling of the financial crisis. A new left-wing government was formed
a week later and immediately set about removing Central Bank governor Davíð
Oddsson and his aides from the bank through changes in law. Davíð was removed on
26 February 2009 in the wake of protests outside the Central Bank.

Thousands of Icelanders have moved from the country after the collapse, and many
of those moved to Norway. In 2005, 293 people moved from Iceland to Norway; in
2009, the figure was 1,625. In April 2010, the Icelandic Parliament‘s Special
Investigation Commission published the findings of its investigation, revealing
the extent of control fraud in this crisis. By June 2012, Landsbanki managed to
repay about half of the Icesave debt.

According to Bloomberg, Iceland is on the trajectory of 2% unemployment as a
result of crisis-management decisions made back in 2008, including allowing the
banks to fail.

Iceland has a high level of car ownership per capita; with a car for every 1.5
inhabitants; it is the main form of transport. Iceland has 13,034 km (8,099 mi)
of administered roads, of which 4,617 km (2,869 mi) are paved and 8,338 km
(5,181 mi) are not. A great number of roads remain unpaved, mostly little-used
rural roads. The road speed limits are 50 km/h (31 mph) in towns, 80 km/h
(50 mph) on gravel country roads and 90 km/h (56 mph) on hard-surfaced roads.
Iceland currently has no railways.

Route 1, or the Ring Road (Icelandic: Þjóðvegur 1 or Hringvegur), was completed
in 1974, and is a main road that runs around Iceland and connects all the
inhabited parts of the island, with the interior of the island being
uninhabited. This paved road is 1,332 km (828 mi) long with one lane in each
direction, except near larger towns and cities and in the Hvalfjörður Tunnel
(also the site of a toll) where it has more lanes. Many bridges on it,
especially in the north and east, are single lane and made of timber and/or
steel.

The main hub for international transport is Keflavík International Airport,
which serves Reykjavík and the country in general. It is 48 km (30 mi) to the
west of Reykjavík. Domestic flights, flights to Greenland and the Faroe Islands,
and business flights operate mostly out of Reykjavík Airport, which lies in the
city centre. Most general aviation traffic is also in Reykjavík. There are 103
registered airports and airfields in Iceland; most of them are unpaved and
located in rural areas. The biggest airport in Iceland is Keflavík International
Airport and the biggest airfield is Geitamelur, a four-runway field around
100 km (62 mi) east of Reykjavík, dedicated exclusively to gliding. There are a
number of international airlines that fly to and from Iceland regularly.

Renewable sources—geothermal and hydropower—provide effectively all of Iceland's
electricity and around 85% of the nation's total primary energy consumption,
with most of the remainder consisting of imported oil products used in
transportation and in the fishing fleet. Iceland expects to be
energy-independent by 2050. Iceland's largest geothermal power plants are
Hellisheiði and Nesjavellir, while Kárahnjúkar Hydropower Plant is the country's
largest hydroelectric power station. When the Kárahnjúkavirkjun started
operating, Iceland became the world's largest electricity producer per capita.

Icelanders emit 6.29 tonnes of CO2 in 2009 equivalent of greenhouse gases per
capita. Iceland is one of the few countries that have filling stations
dispensing hydrogen fuel for cars powered by fuel cells. It is also one of a few
countries currently capable of producing hydrogen in adequate quantities at a
reasonable cost, because of Iceland's plentiful renewable sources of energy.

On 22 January 2009, Iceland announced its first round of offshore licences for
companies wanting to conduct hydrocarbon exploration and production in a region
northeast of Iceland, known as the Dreki area. Two exploration licenses have
been awarded.

In 2010 Iceland was noted by Guinness World Records as "The Greenest Country",
reaching highest score by the Environmental Sustainability Index which measures
a country's water use, biodiversity and adoption of clean energies with a score
of 93.5/100.

As of 2012[update], the government of Iceland is in talks with the government of
United Kingdom about the possibility of constructing a high-voltage
direct-current connector for transmission of electricity between the two
countries. Such a cable would give Iceland access to a market where electricity
prices have generally been much higher than those in Iceland. Iceland has
considerable renewable energy resources, especially geothermal energy and
hydropower resources, and most of the potential has not been developed, partly
because there is not enough demand for additional electricity generation
capacity from the residents and industry of Iceland, but the United Kingdom is
interested in importing inexpensive electricity from renewable sources of
energy, and this could lead to further development of the energy resources.

The Ministry of Education, Science and Culture is responsible for the policies
and methods that schools must use, and they issue the National Curriculum
Guidelines. However, playschools, primary schools, and lower secondary schools
are funded and administered by the municipalities. The government does allow
citizens to Home educate their children, however under a very strict set of
demands. Students must adhere closely to the government mandated curriculum, and
the parent teaching must acquire a government approved teaching certificate.

Nursery school, or leikskóli, is non-compulsory education for children younger
than six years, and is the first step in the education system. The current
legislation concerning playschools was passed in 1994. They are also responsible
for ensuring that the curriculum is suitable so as to make the transition into
compulsory education as easy as possible.

Compulsory education, or grunnskóli, comprises primary and lower secondary
education, which often is conducted at the same institution. Education is
mandatory by law for children aged from 6 to 16 years. The school year lasts
nine months, beginning between 21 August and 1 September, ending between 31 May
and 10 June. The minimum number of school days was once 170, but after a new
teachers' wage contract, it increased to 180. Lessons take place five days a
week. All public schools have mandatory education in Christianity, although an
exemption may be considered by the Minister of Education.

Upper secondary education, or framhaldsskóli, follows lower secondary education.
These schools are also known as gymnasia in English. Though not compulsory,
everyone who has had a compulsory education has the right to upper secondary
education. This stage of education is governed by the Upper Secondary School Act
of 1996. All schools in Iceland are mixed sex schools. The largest seat of
higher education is the University of Iceland, which has its main campus in
central Reykjavík. Other schools offering university-level instruction include
Reykjavík University, University of Akureyri, Agricultural University of Iceland
and Bifröst University.

An OECD assessment found 64% of Icelanders aged 25–64 have earned the equivalent
of a high-school degree, which is lower than the OECD average of 73%. Among 25-
to 34-year-olds, only 69% have earned the equivalent of a high-school degree,
significantly lower than the OECD average of 80%. Nevertheless, Iceland's
education system is considered excellent: the Programme for International
Student Assessment currently ranks it as the 16th best performing, above the
OECD average. Students were particularly proficient in reading and mathematics.

According to a 2013 Eurostat report by the European Commission, Iceland spends
around 3.11% of its GDP on scientific research and development (R&D), over 1
percentage point higher than the EU average of 2.03%, and has set a target of 4%
to reach by 2020. A 2010 UNESCO report found that out of 72 countries that spend
the most on R&D (100 million US dollars or more), Iceland ranked 9th by
proportion of GDP, tied with Taiwan, Switzerland, and Germany and ahead of
France, the UK, and Canada.

The original population of Iceland was of Nordic and Gaelic origin. This is
evident from literary evidence dating from the settlement period as well as from
later scientific studies such as blood type and genetic analyses. One such
genetics study has indicated that the majority of the male settlers were of
Nordic origin while the majority of the women were of Gaelic origin, meaning
many settlers of Iceland were indeed Norwegian Viking warriors who brought
Gaelic slaves with them.

Iceland has extensive genealogical records dating back to the late 17th century
and fragmentary records extending back to the Age of Settlement. The
biopharmaceutical company deCODE genetics has funded the creation of a genealogy
database that is intended to cover all of Iceland's known inhabitants. It views
the database, called Íslendingabók, as a valuable tool for conducting research
on genetic diseases, given the relative isolation of Iceland's population.

The population of the island is believed to have varied from 40,000 to 60,000 in
the period ranging from initial settlement until the mid-19th century. During
that time, cold winters, ash fall from volcanic eruptions, and bubonic plagues
adversely affected the population several times. There were 37 famine years in
Iceland between 1500 and 1804. The first census was carried out in 1703 and
revealed that the population was then 50,358. After the destructive volcanic
eruptions of the Laki volcano during 1783–1784, the population reached a low of
about 40,000. Improving living conditions have triggered a rapid increase in
population since the mid-19th century—from about 60,000 in 1850 to 320,000 in
2008. Iceland has a relatively young population for a developed country, with
one out of five people being 14 years old or younger. With a fertility rate of
2.1, Iceland is one of only a few European countries with a birth rate
sufficient for long-term population growth (see table on the left).

In December 2007, 33,678 people (13.5% of the total population) living in
Iceland had been born abroad, including children of Icelandic parents living
abroad. Around 19,000 people (6% of the population) held foreign citizenship.
Polish people make up the largest minority group by a considerable margin, and
still form the bulk of the foreign workforce. About 8,000 Poles now live in
Iceland, 1,500 of them in Fjarðabyggð where they make up 75% of the workforce
who are constructing the Fjarðarál aluminium plant. The recent increase in
immigration has been credited[by whom?] to a labour shortage due to the booming
economy at the time, as well as to the lifting of restrictions on the movement
of people from the countries that were a part of the 2004 enlargement of the
European Union.[citation needed] Large-scale construction projects in the east
of Iceland (see Kárahnjúkar Hydropower Plant) have also brought in many people
whose stay is expected to be temporary. Many Polish immigrants were also
considering leaving in 2008 as a result of the Icelandic financial crisis.

The southwest corner of Iceland is the most densely populated region. It is also
the location of the capital Reykjavík, the northernmost national capital in the
world. The largest towns outside the Greater Reykjavík area are Akureyri and
Reykjanesbær, although the latter is relatively close to the capital.

Some 500 Icelanders under the leadership of Erik the Red colonised Greenland
among the existing paleo-Eskimo inhabitants in the late 10th century. The total
population reached a high point of perhaps 5,000 and developed independent
institutions before disappearing by 1500. People from Greenland attempted to set
up a colony at Vinland in North America, but it was abandoned in the face of
hostility from the indigenous residents. Emigration to the United States and
Canada began in the 1870s. As of 2006[update], Canada had over 88,000 people of
Icelandic descent, while there are more than 40,000 Americans of Icelandic
descent, according to the 2000 US census.

Iceland's official written and spoken language is Icelandic, a North Germanic
language descended from Old Norse. In grammar and vocabulary, it has changed
less from Old Norse than the other Nordic languages; Icelandic has preserved
more verb and noun inflection, and has to a considerable extent developed new
vocabulary based on native roots rather than borrowings from other languages.
The puristic tendency in the development of Icelandic vocabulary is to a large
degree a result of conscious language planning, in addition to centuries of
isolation. Icelandic is the only living language to retain the use of the runic
letter Þ in Latin script. The closest living relative of the Icelandic language
is Faroese.

Icelandic Sign Language was officially recognised as a minority language in
2011. In education, its use for Iceland's deaf community is regulated by the
National Curriculum Guide.

English and Danish are compulsory subjects in the school curriculum. Both
languages are widely understood and spoken. Other commonly spoken languages are
Swedish, Norwegian, German and French. Polish is mostly spoken by the local
Polish community (the biggest minority of Iceland), and Danish is mostly spoken
in a way largely comprehensible to Swedes and Norwegians—it is often referred to
as skandinavíska (i. e. Scandinavian) in Iceland.

Rather than using family names, as is the usual custom in most western nations,
Icelanders carry patronymic or matronymic surnames, patronyms being far more
commonly practiced. Patronymic last names are based on the first name of the
father, while matronymic names are based on the first name of the mother. These
follow the person's given name, e.g. Elísabet Jónsdóttir ("Elísabet, Jón's
daughter" (Jón, being the father)) or Ólafur Katrínarson ("Ólafur, Katrín's son"
(Katrín being the mother)). Consequently, Icelanders refer to one another by
their given name, and the Icelandic telephone directory is listed alphabetically
by first name rather than by surname. All new names must be decided upon by the
Icelandic Naming Committee.

Iceland has a universal health care system that is administered by its Ministry
of Welfare (Icelandic: Velferðarráðuneytið) and paid for mostly by taxes (85%)
and to a lesser extent by service fees (15%). Unlike most countries, there are
no private hospitals, and private insurance is practically nonexistent.

A considerable portion of the government budget is assigned to health care, and
Iceland ranks 11th in health care expenditures as a percentage of GDP and 14th
in spending per capita. Over all, the country's health care system is one of the
best performing in the world, ranked 15th by the World Health Organization.
According to an OECD report, Iceland devotes far more resources to healthcare
than most industrialised nations. As of 2009[update], Iceland had 3.7 doctors
per 1,000 people (compared with an average of 3.1 in OECD countries) and 15.3
nurses per 1,000 people (compared with an OECD average of 8.4).

Icelanders are among the world's healthiest people, with 81% reporting they are
in good health, according to an OECD survey. Although it is a growing problem,
obesity is not as prevalent as in other developed countries. Iceland has many
campaigns for health and wellbeing. Most famously, the television show Lazytown,
starring and created by former gymnastics champion Magnus Scheving. Infant
mortality is one of the lowest in the world, and the proportion of the
population that smokes is lower than the OECD average. Almost all women choose
to terminate pregnancies of children with Down Syndrome in Iceland. The average
life expectancy is 81.8 (compared to an OECD average of 79.5), the 4th highest
in the world.

Additionally, Iceland has a very low level of pollution, thanks to an
overwhelming reliance on cleaner geothermal energy, a low population density,
and a high level of environmental consciousness among citizens. According to an
OECD assessment, the amount of toxic material in the atmosphere is far lower
than any other industrialised country measured.

Icelanders have freedom of religion guaranteed under the Constitution of
Iceland, although the Church of Iceland, a Lutheran body, is the state church:

Iceland is a very secular country; as with other Nordic nations, religious
attendance is relatively low. The above statistics represent administrative
membership of religious organisations, which does not necessarily reflect the
belief demographics of the population of Iceland. According to a study published
in 2001, 23% of the inhabitants were either atheist or agnostic. A Gallup poll
conducted in 2012 found that 57% of Icelanders considered themselves
"religious", 31% considered themselves "non-religious", while 10% defined
themselves as "convinced atheists", placing Iceland among the ten countries with
the highest proportions of atheists in the world.

Icelandic culture has its roots in North Germanic traditions. Icelandic
literature is popular, in particular the sagas and eddas that were written
during the High and Late Middle Ages. Centuries of isolation have helped to
insulate the country's Nordic culture from external influence; a prominent
example is the preservation of the Icelandic language, which remains the closest
to Old Norse of all modern Nordic languages.[citation needed]

In contrast to other Nordic countries, Icelanders place relatively great
importance on independence and self-sufficiency; in a public opinion analysis
conducted by the European Commission, over 85% of Icelanders believe
independence is "very important," compared to 47% of Norwegians, 49% of Danes,
and an average of 53% for the EU25. Icelanders also have a very strong work
ethic, working some of the longest hours of any industrialised nation.

According to a poll conducted by the OECD, 66% of Icelanders were satisfied with
their lives, while 70% believed that their lives will be satisfying in the
future. Similarly, 83% of people in Iceland reported having more positive
experiences in an average day than negative ones, compared to an OECD average of
72%, which makes Iceland one of the happiest countries in the OECD. A more
recent 2012 survey found that around three quarters of respondents stated they
were satisfied with their lives, compared to a global average of about 53%.

Iceland is liberal with regard to LGBT rights issues. In 1996, the Icelandic
parliament passed legislation to create registered partnerships for same-sex
couples, conferring nearly all the rights and benefits of marriage. In 2006,
parliament voted unanimously to grant same-sex couples the same rights as
heterosexual couples in adoption, parenting and assisted insemination treatment.
On 11 June 2010, the Icelandic parliament amended the marriage law, making it
gender neutral and defining marriage as between two individuals, making Iceland
one of the first countries in the world to legalise same-sex marriage. The law
took effect on 27 June 2010. The amendment to the law also means registered
partnerships for same-sex couples are now no longer possible, and marriage is
their only option—identical to the existing situation for opposite-sex couples.

Icelanders are known for their deep sense of community: an OECD survey found
that 98% believe they know someone they could rely on in a time of need, higher
than in any other industrialised country. Similarly, only 6% reported "rarely"
or "never" socializing with others. This high level of social cohesion is
attributed to the small size and homogeneity of the population, as well as to a
long history of harsh survival in an isolated environment, which reinforced the
importance of unity and cooperation.

Egalitarianism is highly valued among the people of Iceland, with income
inequality being among the lowest in the world. The constitution explicitly
prohibits the enactment of noble privileges, titles, and ranks. Everyone is
addressed by their first name. As in other Nordic countries, equality between
the sexes is very high; Iceland is consistently ranked among the top three
countries in the world for women to live in.

Iceland's best-known classical works of literature are the Icelanders' sagas,
prose epics set in Iceland's age of settlement. The most famous of these include
Njáls saga, about an epic blood feud, and Grænlendinga saga and Eiríks saga,
describing the discovery and settlement of Greenland and Vinland (modern
Newfoundland). Egils saga, Laxdæla saga, Grettis saga, Gísla saga and Gunnlaugs
saga ormstungu are also notable and popular Icelanders' sagas.

A translation of the Bible was published in the 16th century. Important
compositions since the 15th to the 19th century include sacred verse, most
famously the Passion Hymns of Hallgrímur Pétursson, and rímur, rhyming epic
poems. Originating in the 14th century, rímur were popular into the 19th
century, when the development of new literary forms was provoked by the
influential, National-Romantic writer Jónas Hallgrímsson. In recent times,
Iceland has produced many great writers, the best-known of whom is arguably
Halldór Laxness, who received the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1955 (the only
Icelander to win a Nobel Prize thus far). Steinn Steinarr was an influential
modernist poet during the early 20th century who remains popular.

Icelanders are avid consumers of literature, with the highest number of
bookstores per capita in the world. For its size, Iceland imports and translates
more international literature than any other nation. Iceland also has the
highest per capita publication of books and magazines, and around 10% of the
population will publish a book in their lifetimes.

The distinctive rendition of the Icelandic landscape by its painters can be
linked to nationalism and the movement for home rule and independence, which was
very active in the mid-19th century.

Contemporary Icelandic painting is typically traced to the work of Þórarinn
Þorláksson, who, following formal training in art in the 1890s in Copenhagen,
returned to Iceland to paint and exhibit works from 1900 to his death in 1924,
almost exclusively portraying the Icelandic landscape. Several other Icelandic
men and women artists studied at Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts at that time,
including Ásgrímur Jónsson, who together with Þórarinn created a distinctive
portrayal of Iceland's landscape in a romantic naturalistic style. Other
landscape artists quickly followed in the footsteps of Þórarinn and Ásgrímur.
These included Jóhannes Kjarval and Júlíana Sveinsdóttir. Kjarval in particular
is noted for the distinct techniques in the application of paint that he
developed in a concerted effort to render the characteristic volcanic rock that
dominates the Icelandic environment. Einar Hákonarson is an expressionistic and
figurative painter who by some is considered to have brought the figure back
into Icelandic painting. In the 1980s, many Icelandic artists worked with the
subject of the new painting in their work.

In the recent years artistic practice has multiplied, and the Icelandic art
scene has become a setting for many large scale projects and exhibitions. The
artist run gallery space Kling og Bang, members of which later ran the studio
complex and exhibition venue Klink og Bank, has been a significant part of the
trend of self-organised spaces, exhibitions and projects. The Living Art Museum,
Reykjavík Municipal Art Museum, Reykjavík Art Museum and the National Gallery of
Iceland are the larger, more established institutions, curating shows and
festivals.

Much Icelandic music is related to Nordic music, and includes vibrant folk and
pop traditions, medieval music group Voces Thules, alternative and indie rock
bands The Sugarcubes and Of Monsters and Men, jazz fusion band Mezzoforte,
musicians Björk and Emilíana Torrini, and post-rock band Sigur Rós. The national
anthem of Iceland is Lofsöngur, written by Matthías Jochumsson, with music by
Sveinbjörn Sveinbjörnsson.

Traditional Icelandic music is strongly religious. Hymns, both religious and
secular, are a particularly well-developed form of music, due to the scarcity of
musical instruments throughout much of Iceland's history. Hallgrímur Pétursson
wrote many Protestant hymns in the 17th century. Icelandic music was modernised
in the 19th century, when Magnús Stephensen brought pipe organs, which were
followed by harmoniums. Other vital traditions of Icelandic music are epic
alliterative and rhyming ballads called rímur. Rímur are epic tales, usually a
cappella, which can be traced back to skaldic poetry, using complex metaphors
and elaborate rhyme schemes. The best known rímur poet of the 19th century was
Sigurður Breiðfjörð (1798–1846). A modern revitalisation of the tradition began
in 1929 with the formation of Iðunn.[clarification needed]

Icelandic contemporary music consists of a big group of bands, ranging from
pop-rock groups such as Bang Gang, Quarashi and Amiina to solo ballad singers
like Bubbi Morthens, Megas and Björgvin Halldórsson. Independent music is very
strong in Iceland, with bands such as múm, The Sugarcubes, HAM, Of Monsters and
Men, Sigur Rós, Sóley and Viking metal band Skálmöld, as well as solo artists
Emilíana Torrini and Mugison.

Some Icelandic jazz musicians and jazz bands have earned a reputation outside
Iceland. Perhaps best known is the jazz fusion band Mezzoforte and Los
Angeles-based jazz vocalist Anna Mjöll. Many Icelandic artists and bands have
enjoyed international success, most notably Björk and Sigur Rós but also
Quarashi, Hera, Ampop, Mínus and múm. The main music festival is arguably
Iceland Airwaves, an annual event on the Icelandic music scene, where Icelandic
bands along with foreign ones play in the clubs of Reykjavík for a week.
Electronic musicians include ones such as Thor and GusGus.

Among Iceland's best-known classical composers are Daníel Bjarnason and Anna S.
Þorvaldsdóttir (Anna Thorvaldsdottir), who in 2012 received the Nordic Council
Music Prize and in 2015 was chosen as the New York Philharmonic's Kravis
Emerging Composer, an honor that includes a $50,000 cash prize and a commission
to write a composition for the orchestra; she is the second recipient.

Iceland's largest television stations are the state-run Sjónvarpið and the
privately owned Stöð 2 and SkjárEinn. Smaller stations exist, many of them
local. Radio is broadcast throughout the country, including some parts of the
interior. The main radio stations are Rás 1, Rás 2, X-ið 977, Bylgjan and FM957.
The daily newspapers are Morgunblaðið and Fréttablaðið. The most popular
websites are the news sites Vísir and Mbl.is.

Iceland is home to LazyTown (Icelandic: Latibær), a children's television
programme created by Magnús Scheving. It has become a very popular programme for
children and adults and is shown in over 100 countries, including the UK, the
Americas and Sweden. The LazyTown studios are located in Garðabær. The 2015
television crime series Trapped aired in the UK on BBC4 in February and March
2016, to critical acclaim and according to the Guardian "the unlikeliest TV hit
of the year".

In 1992 the Icelandic film industry achieved its greatest recognition hitherto,
when Friðrik Þór Friðriksson was nominated for the Academy Award for Best
Foreign Language Film for his film, Children of Nature. It features the story of
an old man who is unnable to continue running his farm in the countryside and
after being unwelcomed in his daughter and father-in-law house in the town, is
put in a home for the elderly. There, he meets and old girlfriend of his youth
and they both begin a journey through the wilds of Iceland to die together. This
is the only Icelandic movie to haver ever been nominated for an Academy Award.

Singer-songwriter Björk received international acclaim for her starring role in
the Danish musical drama Dancer in the Dark directed by Lars von Trier, in which
she plays Selma Ježková, a factory worker who struggles to pay for her son's eye
operation. The film premiered at the 2000 Cannes Film Festival, where she won
the Best Actress Award. The movie also led Björk to nominations for Best
Original Song at the 73rd Academy Awards, with the song I've Seen It All and for
a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture - Drama.

Guðrún S. Gísladóttir, who is Icelandic, played one of the major roles in
Russian filmmaker Andrei Tarkovsky's 1986 film, The Sacrifice. Anita Briem,
known for her performance in Showtime's The Tudors, is also Icelandic. Briem
starred in the 2008 film Journey to the Center of the Earth, which shot scenes
in Iceland. The 2002 James Bond movie Die Another Day is set for a large-part in
Iceland. Christopher Nolan's 2014 film, Interstellar was also filmed in Iceland
for some of its scenes.

On 17 June 2010, the parliament passed the Icelandic Modern Media Initiative, a
resolution proposing greater protection of free speech rights and the identity
of journalists and whistle-blowers, the strongest journalist protection law in
the world. According to a 2011 report by Freedom House, Iceland is one of the
highest ranked countries in press freedom.

CCP Games, developers of the critically acclaimed EVE Online and Dust 514, is
headquartered in Reykjavík. CCP Games hosts the third most populated MMO in the
world, which also has the largest total game area for an online game.

Iceland has a highly developed internet culture, with around 95% of the
population having internet access, the highest proportion in the world. Iceland
ranked 12th in the World Economic Forum's 2009–2010 Network Readiness Index,
which measures a country's ability to competitively exploit communications
technology. The United Nations International Telecommunication Union ranks the
country 3rd in its development of information and communications technology,
having moved up four places between 2008 and 2010. In February 2013 the country
(ministry of the interior) was researching possible methods to protect children
in regards to Internet pornography, claiming that pornography online is a threat
to children as it supports child slavery and abuse. Strong voices within the
community expressed concerns with this, stating that it is impossible to block
access to pornography without compromising the freedom of speech.

Much of Iceland's cuisine is based on fish, lamb, and dairy products, with
little to no utilization of herbs or spices. Due to the island's climate, fruits
and vegetables are not generally a component of traditional dishes, although the
use of greenhouses has made them more common in contemporary food. Þorramatur is
a selection of traditional cuisine consisting of many dishes, and is usually
consumed around the month of Þorri, which begins on the first Friday after 19
January. Traditional dishes also include skyr, hákarl (cured shark), cured ram,
singed sheep heads, and black pudding. Puffin is considered a local delicacy
that is often prepared through broiling.

Breakfast usually consists of pancakes, cereal, fruit, and coffee, while lunch
may take the form of a smörgåsbord. The main meal of the day for most Icelanders
is dinner, which usually involves fish or lamb as the main course. Seafood is
central to most Icelandic cooking, particularly cod and haddock but also salmon,
herring, and halibut. It is often prepared in a wide variety of ways, either
smoked, pickled, boiled, or dried. Lamb is by far the most common meat, and it
tends to be either smoke-cured (known as hangikjöt) or salt-preserved
(saltkjöt). Many older dishes make use of every part of the sheep, such as
slátur, which consists of offal (internal organs and entrails) minced together
with blood and served in sheep stomach. Additionally, boiled or mashed potatoes,
pickled cabbage, green beans, and rye bread are prevalent side dishes.

Coffee is a popular beverage in Iceland, and is drunk at breakfast, after meals,
and with a light snack in mid-afternoon. Coca-Cola is also widely consumed, to
the extent that the country is said to have one of the highest per capita
consumption rates in the world. Iceland's signature alcoholic beverage is
Brennivín (literally "burnt (i.e. distilled) wine"), which is similar to
Scandinavian akvavit. It is a type of vodka made from distilled potatoes and
flavoured with either caraway seeds or angelica. Its potency has earned it the
nickname svarti dauði ("Black Death").

Sport is an important part of Icelandic culture, as the population is generally
quite active. The main traditional sport in Iceland is Glíma, a form of
wrestling thought to have originated in medieval times.

Popular sports include association football, track and field, handball and
basketball. Handball is often referred to as the national sport, and Iceland's
men's national team is ranked among the top 12 in the world. The Icelandic
national football team qualified for the UEFA European football championship for
the first time in 2016 and advanced to the quarter-final to play against France.
They defeated England 2–1 in the round of 16, with goals from Ragnar Sigurðsson
and Kolbeinn Sigþórsson. The Icelandic women's team also excel at football
relative to the size of the country, with the national team ranked 15th by FIFA.
In 2014 the Icelandic men's national basketball team qualified into the
EuroBasket 2015 for the first time in the country history.

Iceland has excellent conditions for skiing, fishing, snowboarding, ice climbing
and rock climbing, although mountain climbing and hiking are preferred by the
general public. Iceland is also a world-class destination for alpine ski touring
and Telemark skiing, with the Troll Peninsula in Northern Iceland being the main
centre of activity. Although the country's environment is generally ill-suited
for golf, there are nevertheless lots of golf courses throughout the island, and
Iceland has a greater percentage of the population playing golf than Scotland
with over 17,000 registered golfers out of a population of approximately
300,000. Iceland hosts an annual international golf tournament known as the
Arctic Open played through the night during the summer solstice at Akureyri Golf
Club. Iceland has also won the most competitions for World's Strongest Man, with
eight titles shared evenly between Magnús Ver Magnússon and Jón Páll Sigmarsson.
Iceland is also one of the leading countries in ocean rowing, boasting some of
the most significant records in the sport. Icelandic rower Fiann Paul has
claimed overall speed Guinness World Records for crossing each of the three
oceans in a man-powered row boat, as well as the notable Guinness title of the
first rower to ever hold all three records simultaneously, claiming 6 rowing
world records in total for Iceland by 2016.

Swimming is popular in Iceland. Geothermally heated outdoor pools are
widespread, and swimming courses are a mandatory part of the national
curriculum. Horseback riding, which was historically the most prevalent form of
transportation on the island, remains a common pursuit for many Icelanders.

The oldest sport association in Iceland is the Reykjavík Shooting Association,
founded in 1867. Rifle shooting became very popular in the 19th century with the
encouragement of politicians and nationalists who were pushing for Icelandic
independence. To this day, it remains a significant pastime.

Iceland has also produced many chess masters and hosted the historic World Chess
Championship 1972 in Reykjavík during the height of the Cold War. As of
2008[update], there have been nine Icelandic chess grandmasters, a considerable
number given the small size of the population. Bridge is also popular, with
Iceland participating in a number of international tournaments. Iceland won the
world bridge championship (the Bermuda Bowl) in Yokohama, Japan, in 1991 and
took second place (with Sweden) in Hamilton, Bermuda, in 1950.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hal_Robson-Kanu

Thomas Henry Alex "Hal" Robson-Kanu (born 21 May 1989) is a professional
footballer who plays as a striker for West Bromwich Albion and the Wales
national football team. Although he initially played primarily on the wing, he
has also been used as a forward, including Wales' run to the semi-finals of UEFA
Euro 2016.

Robson-Kanu started his career as a schoolboy at Arsenal but was released at 15
and joined Reading. After graduating from the Academy in 2007 he spent time on
loan at Southend United and Swindon Town before returning to Reading and making
his first team debut in 2009. Limited to mainly substitute appearances during
his first season, he became an important member of the squad appearing regularly
during the 2011–12 Championship winning campaign. He made his Premier League
debut in 2012 and went on to score 30 goals in 228 games for the club before his
release in 2016. He then signed for West Bromwich Albion.

At international level Robson-Kanu initially represented the country of his
birth, England, at under-19 and under-20 level. In 2010, he switched allegiance
to Wales, the country of his grandmother, playing for the under-21 side before
his debut for the senior team against Croatia on 23 May that year. Robson-Kanu
was selected to represent Wales at UEFA Euro 2016, where they made the
semi-finals.

Born in Acton, London, Robson-Kanu began his career at Arsenal as a schoolboy
aged 10. He was released by the club at 15 and joined Reading after speaking to
then Academy manager Brendan Rodgers. After graduating from the Academy he
signed his first professional contract in July 2007, penning a two-year deal
with the club. The 2007 Peace Cup in South Korea saw Robson-Kanu involved with
the Reading senior team for the first time with appearances against River Plate
and Shimizu S-Pulse. Steve Coppell's policy of resting first-team players for
cup matches saw Robson-Kanu selected on the bench for the first time on 5
January 2008 for the FA Cup third round tie against Tottenham Hotspur, though he
remained an unused substitute.

Not in contention for a regular place in the Reading first team, Robson-Kanu's
first experience of senior football came on 30 January 2008 when he joined
Southend United on loan until the end of the season. He made his debut three
days later as a second-half substitute in a 2–2 draw away at Leyton Orient and
scored his first career goal against Nottingham Forest. He struck twice more in
the next two games against Huddersfield Town and Swansea City and returned to
Reading with three goals in eight appearances. Robson-Kanu was again involved in
the first team during the 2008–09 pre-season, scoring a goal in a 9–0 win over
Didcot Town in July. He re-joined Southend on a month's loan on 21 August 2008
and after one goal in six appearances extended his spell for a second month. He
returned to Reading on 15 November after his three-month spell came to an end
having made 15 appearances, scoring twice, during his second spell at the club.

After returning to Reading he was among the substitutes for the FA Cup third
round tie against Cardiff City on 3 January 2009. He would again have to wait to
make his debut though, remaining on the bench as Cardiff won the match. On 26
January 2009 he joined Swindon Town on a one-month loan which, after six games,
was extended for a further month. Midway through his spell at Swindon, having
impressed on loan at the club as well with Southend previously, he signed a new
contract with Reading until 2011. He cemented a regular place in the Swindon
team and started in all 20 of his appearances for the club before returning to
Reading after three months. At the conclusion of his spell Swindon boss Danny
Wilson hailed Robson-Kanu and fellow loanee Gordon Greer for their "fantastic
impression" which helped the club pull away from relegation.

The 2009–10 season saw Robson-Kanu's former Academy boss Brendan Rodgers take
over as Reading manager. He scored five goals during pre-season, including a
hat-trick against Jonsereds IF in just 28 minutes during the first game of the
tour of Sweden. Robson-Kanu finally made his competitive debut for Reading
starting on the right wing in a 0–0 draw with Nottingham Forest on the opening
day of the season. He was used mainly as a substitute during his first season,
starting just four times in 18 appearances.

The following season saw Robson-Kanu establish himself in the first team setup.
He scored his first Reading goal in the League Cup against Northampton Town on
24 August 2010, and followed it with his first league goal in a 3–0 win against
Barnsley a month later, having earlier set-up Jimmy Kébé for the second. He
continued to feature regularly and finished the season in good goalscoring form,
netting four times from March onwards including the winner in a 2–1 wins over
Preston North End and Derby County as Reading finished in the play-off
positions. He came on as a late substitute in the 4–2 play-off final defeat to
Swansea but had no time to influence the game and finished the season with six
goals in 34 appearances. His contract expired at the end of the season and
despite interest from other Championship clubs including Millwall and
Portsmouth, he signed a new three-year contract with Reading in July keeping him
with the club until 2014.

After the sale of Shane Long in August 2011, Robson-Kanu was played as a forward
by Brian McDermott during some of the pre-season, a position he was familiar
with from his Academy years. He struck twice playing up front in the warm-up
fixtures and began the season in good goalscoring form with two in the first
four games against Leicester City and Barnsley. With injuries to both Kebe and
Jobi McAnuff during various points of the season, he soon reverted to a role on
the wings though his season followed a familiar pattern to previous years as he
was in and out the side, playing a supporting role to the two senior wingers.
His longest run of starts came in October when he was named on the teamsheet for
six consecutive games. He scored twice more during the campaign, including a
spectacular volley against Millwall and finished the season having made 37
appearances, the most in his career to date.

In Kébé, McAnuff and new signing Garath McCleary, Robson-Kanu faced stiff
competition for places on the wing for Reading's return to the Premier League.
With Kébé injured, he was named on the teamsheet on the opening day of the
season as Reading came from behind to draw against Stoke City. Limited to a
substitutes role over the next three months, he still managed to score twice, in
a defeat to Tottenham Hotspur and a 3–3 draw with Fulham. His only two starts
came in the League cup, including the 7–5 defeat to Arsenal in October. He had
to wait until 17 November for his next league start in Reading's 2–1 win over
Everton, their first league victory of the season, and was a regular over the
next month, scoring his third goal of the season in the defeat to Manchester
United. Despite his goals, Robson-Kanu again had to settle for a place on the
bench with two FA Cup matches his only starts for the club between December and
March. He scored a late consolation goal coming on as a substitute against
Everton on 2 March and returned to the lineup for the following game against
Aston Villa.

The game against Villa proved to be Brian McDermott's last in charge and
Robson-Kanu, having played only a bit-part role under the former manager, began
to feature more prominently with the appointment of Nigel Adkins. He missed just
two games under Adkins through a freak knee injury, and with a regular berth on
the wing finished the season strongly, scoring against Arsenal, and twice in
Reading's 4–2 win over Fulham. Having enjoyed his most prolific season yet,
scoring seven times, Robson-Kanu was nominated for Reading Player of the Season.
In a fans vote he finished in third place behind Adam le Fondre and Alex
McCarthy, despite all three players starting 13 or fewer league games all
season. He signed a new contract in July 2013, keeping him with Reading until
June 2016. Reading announced on 9 May 2016, that Robson-Kanu would leave Reading
when his contract expired at the end of June 2016.

On 31 August after reportedly turning down "significant offers" from Asia,
Robson-Kanu signed a two-year contract, with the option of a third year, with
Premier League side West Bromwich Albion. He made his first start of the season
on 31 December in a 2-1 win over Southampton, finishing the game with a goal and
an assist. In the following game against Hull he came off the bench to help set
up a goal for Albion midfielder James Morrison.

Robson-Kanu was born in England to a Nigerian father, and an English mother of
Welsh descent. Robson-Kanu initially represented England at international level,
making his debut for the under-19 side against Germany in November 2007. He made
a second appearance against Croatia the following year before winning one cap
for the England under-20s against Montenegro in 2009.

In 2010, he switched to Wales, for which he qualifies through his
Caerphilly-born grandmother. The switch came about when Welsh coach Brian Flynn
came to the Reading training ground to see Simon Church, and Glen Little jested
that Robson-Kanu would be eligible for Wales through going on holiday there.
Robson-Kanu told Flynn that the family went to Tenby via picking up his
grandmother in Caerphilly, and Flynn asked whether she was born in Wales.

He was first selected in the Wales under-21s squad for the friendly against
Austria on 18 May 2010 and made his debut in a 1–0 defeat. Robson-Kanu's first
cap for the senior team came just five days later, coming on as a second-half
substitute for Robert Earnshaw in a 2–0 loss to Croatia. He continued to play
for the under-21's after his senior debut and made a further three appearances,
scoring twice, with his last appearance coming in a defeat to Italy which ended
Wales hopes of qualifying for the European Under-21 Football Championships. He
scored his first senior international goal on 22 March 2013 in a 2–1 World Cup
qualifying win over Scotland at Hampden Park.

Robson-Kanu played nine games in Wales' successful qualification campaign for
UEFA Euro 2016, scoring on 13 October 2014 in their 2–1 home win over Cyprus.
After being selected for the final tournament in France, on 11 June he came on
as a 71st-minute substitute in place of Jonny Williams during their opener
against Slovakia and scored the winner in a 2–1 victory in Bordeaux. He also
started as striker in Wales' historic 3–1 quarter-final win on 1 July against
Belgium in Lille and, after outwitting three defenders with a Cruyff turn,
scored the team's second goal. It was nominated in the FIFA Puskás Award for
best goal of the year.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finding_Dory

Finding Dory is a 2016 American 3D computer-animated comedy-drama adventure film
produced by Pixar Animation Studios and released by Walt Disney Pictures.
Directed by Andrew Stanton with co-direction by Angus MacLane, the screenplay
was written by Stanton and Victoria Strouse. The film is a sequel/spinoff to
2003's Finding Nemo and features the returning voices of Ellen DeGeneres and
Albert Brooks, with Hayden Rolence (replacing Alexander Gould), Ed O'Neill,
Kaitlin Olson, Ty Burrell, Diane Keaton and Eugene Levy joining the cast.
Finding Dory focuses on the amnesiac fish Dory, who journeys to be reunited with
her parents.

The film premiered at the El Capitan Theatre in Los Angeles on June 8, 2016, and
was released in the United States on June 17, 2016. Upon release, the film was a
critical and commercial success, grossing over $1 billion worldwide, becoming
the first Pixar film to cross this mark since 2010's Toy Story 3. The film set
numerous records, including the highest-grossing animated film opening of all
time in North America.

Dory, a Regal blue tang, gets separated from her parents as a child. As she
grows up, Dory attempts to search for them, but gradually forgets them due to
her short-term memory loss disability. In the flashback of the previous film,
after accidentally running into Marlin, a clownfish who is looking for his
missing son, Nemo, she joins him on his journey.

One year later, Dory has joined Marlin and Nemo on their reef. One day, Dory has
a flashback and remembers that she has parents. She decides to look for them,
but finds her memory problem an obstacle. She remembers that they lived at the
Jewel of Morro Bay across the ocean in California.

Marlin and Nemo accompany Dory. With the help of Crush, a sea turtle friend,
they ride a water current to California. Upon arrival, Dory accidentally awakens
a squid, who immediately pursues them, almost devouring Nemo. Marlin berates
Dory for endangering them. Her feelings hurt, Dory travels to the surface to
seek help and is captured by staff members from the nearby Marine Life Institute
after getting entangled in six pack rings.

Dory is placed in the quarantine section and tagged. There she meets a grouchy
but well-meaning octopus named Hank. Dory's tag shows that she will be sent to
an aquarium in Cleveland. Due to a traumatic ocean life, Hank wants to live in
the aquarium instead of being released back into the ocean, so he agrees to help
Dory find her parents in exchange for her tag. In one exhibit, Dory encounters
her childhood friend Destiny, a nearsighted whale shark who used to communicate
with Dory through pipes, and Bailey, a beluga whale who mistakenly believes he
has lost his ability to echolocate. Dory subsequently has flashbacks of life
with her parents and struggles to recall details. She finally remembers how she
was separated from her parents: she overheard her mother crying one night, left
to retrieve a shell to cheer her up, and was pulled away by an undertow current.

Marlin and Nemo attempt to rescue Dory. With the help of two sea lions named
Fluke and Rudder and a weird common loon named Becky, they manage to get into
the institute and find her in the pipe system. Other blue tangs tell them that
Dory's parents escaped from the institute a long time ago to search for her and
never came back, leaving Dory believing that they have died. Hank retrieves Dory
from the tank, accidentally leaving Marlin and Nemo behind. He is then
apprehended by one of the employees and unintentionally drops Dory into the
drain, flushing her out to the ocean. While wandering aimlessly, she comes
across a trail of shells; remembering that when she was young, her parents had
set out a similar trail to help her find her way back home, she follows it. At
the end of the trail, Dory finds an empty home with multiple shell trails
leading to it. As she turns to leave, she sees her parents Jenny and Charlie in
the distance. They tell her they spent years laying down the trails for her to
follow in the hopes that she would eventually find them.

In a post-credits scene, the Tank Gang from Finding Nemo, still trapped inside
their (now algae-covered) plastic bags, reach California one year after floating
across the Pacific Ocean. They are promptly picked up by staff members, with
Bloat asking for the second time, "Now what?"

Prior to work on Finding Dory, Disney had planned to make a Finding Nemo sequel
without Pixar's involvement, through Circle 7 Animation, a studio Disney
announced in 2005 with the intention to make sequels to Pixar properties.
However, due to the 2006 acquisition of Pixar by Disney, Circle 7 was shut down
by Disney without ever having produced a film.

In July 2012, it was reported that Andrew Stanton was developing a sequel to
Finding Nemo, with Victoria Strouse writing the script and a release date
scheduled for 2016. However, the same day the news of a potential sequel broke,
Stanton posted a message on his personal Twitter calling into question the
accuracy of these reports. The message said, "Didn't you all learn from Chicken
Little? Everyone calm down. Don't believe everything you read. Nothing to see
here now. #skyisnotfalling." According to a report by The Hollywood Reporter
published in August 2012, Ellen DeGeneres was in negotiations to reprise her
role of Dory. In September 2012, it was confirmed by Stanton, saying: "What was
immediately on the list was writing a second Carter movie. When that went away,
everything slid up. I know I'll be accused by more sarcastic people that it's a
reaction to Carter not doing well, but only in its timing, but not in its
conceit." In February 2013, it was confirmed by the press that Albert Brooks
would reprise the role of Marlin in the sequel.

In April 2013, Disney announced the sequel, Finding Dory, for November 25, 2015,
confirming that DeGeneres and Brooks would be reprising their roles as Dory and
Marlin, respectively. Following a long campaign for a sequel on The Ellen
DeGeneres Show, DeGeneres stated:

In a July 2013 interview with Los Angeles Times, Stanton spoke of the sequel's
origin: "There was polite inquiry from Disney [about a Finding Nemo sequel]. I
was always 'No sequels, no sequels.' But I had to get on board from a VP
standpoint. [Sequels] are part of the necessity of our staying afloat, but we
don't want to have to go there for those reasons. We want to go there
creatively, so we said [to Disney], 'Can you give us the timeline about when we
release them? Because we'd like to release something we actually want to make,
and we might not come up with it the year you want it.'"

In a 2016 interview Stanton stated how the film's story came to be; "I don't
watch my films that often after they're done because I have to watch them so
many times before they come out. So about 2010 when we were getting Finding Nemo
ready for the 10-year re-release in 3D, it was interesting to watch again after
all that time. Something kind of got lodged in the back of my brain and started
to sort of stew. I started to think about how easily Dory could get lost and not
find Marlin and Nemo again. She basically was in the same state that she was
when Marlin found her. I didn't know where she was from. I knew that she had
spent most of her youth wandering the ocean alone, and I wanted to know that she
could find her new family, if she ever got lost again. It's almost like the
parental side of me was worried." Stanton additionally stated: "I knew if I ever
said Finding Dory or mentioned a sequel to Finding Nemo out loud, I’d be done,
[T]here would be no way I'd be able to put that horse back in the barn. So I
kept it very quiet until I knew I had a story that I thought would hold, and
that was in early 2012. So I pitched it to John Lasseter and he was all into it.
Then I got a writer, and once we had a treatment that we kind of liked, I felt
comfortable calling Ellen."

Stanton selected Victoria Strouse to write the screenplay. She later said, "It
was always collaborative with Andrew, but really the screenwriting was me. Of
course, Andrew would do passes, and he and I would brainstorm a lot together and
then we would bring it to the group of story artists. People would weigh in and
share ideas." She pointed to Dory's forgetfulness as a challenge when writing
the script, adding, "You don't realize until you sit down to write a character
who can't remember things how integral memory is to absolutely everything we do,
and that's what creates a narrative that people can follow. When a main
character can't self-reflect and can't tell a story, that character is very
difficult to design because she can't really lead. To get her to be able to lead
and to get an audience to be able to trust her was the hardest thing to do."

The fictional Marine Life Institute depicted extensively in the film is based on
the production team's research trips to the Monterey Bay Aquarium, the Marine
Mammal Center and the Vancouver Aquarium.

The film's ending was revised after Pixar executives viewed Blackfish, a 2013
documentary film which focuses on the dangers of keeping orca whales in
captivity. Initially, some of the characters were to end up in a SeaWorld-like
marine park, but the revision gave them an option to leave. On September 18,
2013, it was announced that the film would be pushed back to a June 17, 2016,
release. Pixar's The Good Dinosaur was moved to the November 25, 2015, release
window to allow more time for production of the film.

Angus MacLane was one of the first people to whom Stanton revealed his idea for
the sequel. Together, with Bob Peterson, they discussed about different ideas
for places Dory would visit during her journey - one of those ideas was the
touch pool sequence. Later, during the Brave (2012) wrap party, Stanton invited
Angus to join him in his first co-directing duty. Stanton described Angus' role
as a "jack of all trades," particularly utilising his experience in animation
and story, as well as in production, having created a few short films himself.

In August 2015, at Disney's D23 Expo, it was announced that Hayden Rolence would
voice Nemo, replacing Alexander Gould from the first film, whose voice has
deepened since reaching adulthood (Gould voiced a minor character in the sequel
instead). In addition to Rolence, Ed O'Neill was revealed to be the voice of
Hank.

To make light more realistic, RenderMan was completely re-engineered, its
biggest change in 25 years.

The film's soundtrack entitled Finding Dory: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack
was composed by Thomas Newman and released on June 17, 2016. Louis Armstrong's
version of "What a Wonderful World" is played during the scene in which fish are
released into the ocean as the truck Dory and Hank are driving crashes into the
water. On May 20, 2016, Sia performed a cover of Nat King Cole's "Unforgettable"
on The Ellen DeGeneres Show following an announcement that it would be featured
in the film.

Finding Dory premiered at the El Capitan Theatre in Los Angeles on June 8, 2016,
and was theatrically released in the United States on June 17, 2016, in 2D,
Disney Digital 3-D and RealD 3D. It was also released to select IMAX 3D
theaters. In April 2016, it was announced that a new Pixar short, Piper,
directed by Alan Barillaro and with music by Adrian Belew, would be shown in
front of the film. It had its UK premiere at the Edinburgh International Film
Festival on June 18, 2016.

Finding Dory was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on Blu-ray
(2D and 3D) and DVD in the United States on November 15, 2016, with a digital
release on October 25. In addition to Piper, the bonus features also included a
short film, titled Marine Life Interviews, featuring interviews with the
inhabitants of the Marine Life Institute about their encounters with Dory.

Finding Dory grossed $486.3 million in the U.S. and Canada and $541.9 million in
other countries for a worldwide total of $1.028 billion, against a budget of
$200 million. It had a worldwide opening of $185.7 million, which is the second
biggest of all time for an animated film behind Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs
($218.4 million), and an IMAX global opening of $6.4 million. On August 16, it
became the fourth film of 2016 to earn $900 million in ticket sales, and on
October 9—its seventeenth weekend—it passed the $1 billion threshold, becoming
the third film of 2016 to reach that mark, joining Captain America: Civil War
and Zootopia, the second Pixar film (after Toy Story 3), the fifth animated film
(after Toy Story 3, Frozen, Minions, and Zootopia), the twelfth Disney film
(fourth Disney animated film), and the twenty-seventh film overall in cinematic
history.

Worldwide, it is the third highest-grossing film of 2016 (behind Civil War and
Rogue One), the highest-grossing animated film of 2016, the second
highest-grossing Pixar film ever (behind Toy Story 3), the fourth
highest-grossing animated film of all time, and the 23rd highest-grossing film
of all time.

In the United States and Canada, Finding Dory opened on June 17, 2016, alongside
Central Intelligence, with projections having the film grossing $110–120 million
in its opening weekend, with some estimates going as high as $130 million. It
received the widest release for a Pixar film (4,305 theaters, breaking Brave's
record), of which 3,200 venues were in 3D, along with 425 premium large format
locales, approximately 100 IMAX theaters and a handful of Dolby Cinema sites. It
was Fandango's top pre-selling animated film of all time, outselling the
previous record-holder, Minions. The film grossed $9.2 million from Thursday
night previews, a record for both Pixar and any animated film, and $54.7 million
on its opening day, marking both the biggest opening day and single-day for an
animated film. This also marks the first time that an animated film has grossed
over $50 million in a single day. It went on to gross $135.1 million in its
opening weekend, finishing first at the box office and setting the record for
the highest opening weekend for both Pixar (breaking Toy Story 3's record) and
any animated film (breaking Shrek the Third's record), and became the third
biggest adjusted for inflation. It is also the second highest opening (excluding
Marvel films and Star Wars: The Force Awakens) for Walt Disney Studios Motion
Pictures behind Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest ($135.6 million) and
is the studio's eighth biggest debut overall. It also became the fifth animated
film and the fifth film of 2016 to open above $100 million. Morever, its opening
also marked the second biggest for the month of June, behind only Jurassic
World. Its opening was 93.8% above Finding Nemo's $70.3 million debut. It
further broke the record for the biggest PLF and Cinemark XD opening for an
animated film with $10.4 million and $2.6 million, respectively. In IMAX, it
made $5 million from 211 theaters, the third best animated IMAX opening behind
Zootopia ($5.2 million) and Toy Story 3 ($8.4 million).

Following its record-breaking openings, it scored the biggest Monday for Pixar
by grossing $19.6 million (breaking Toy Story 3's $15.6 million) and the best
Monday in June for an animated film. However, among all animated films, it is
ranked second — behind 2004's Shrek 2, which made $23.4 million on its first
Monday, and it is also the biggest Tuesday for an animated film with $23.2
million, besting Minions' $16.8 million. It jumped 18.5% over its Monday gross,
a rare achievement for a film. It crossed the $200 million mark in its first
seven days, becoming the first (and fastest) animated film to pass the said
milestone in just a week. It fell only 46% in its second weekend earning $73
million to record the biggest second weekend for an animated film (breaking
Shrek 2's $72.2 million previous record), the biggest for Disney and 2016
(surpassing Captain America: Civil War's $72.6 million), and the eighth biggest
second weekend gross of all time overall. This was despite facing stiff
competition from newcomer Independence Day: Resurgence. It crossed $300 million
in 12 days — a new record for an animated film, surpassing the previous record
held by Shrek 2 and Toy Story 3 (both of which took 18 days), and became the
second animated film of 2016 (after Zootopia), the fourth Disney film of 2016,
and the sixth overall film of the year to cross the milestone. It continued to
dominate the box office for the third straight weekend, despite competitions
from three new wide releases—The Legend of Tarzan, The Purge: Election Year, and
fellow Disney release The BFG—after witnessing a 42% decline to $41.8 million in
three days and $51.4 million in four days, respectively, during the Independence
Day holiday frame. This made it the second time in two years and just the third
time since 1992, the July 4th holiday box office was topped by a film in its
third weekend of release. It broke another record as it passed the $400 million
mark in 21 days, which is the fastest for an animated film, the fastest of 2016,
the fastest for the studio, and the fifth fastest of all time overall. Morever,
it became the second film of 2016 (after Captain America: Civil War), the fifth
animated film, the ninth film for the studio, and the twenty-fourth film overall
to pass the milestone. On the following day (July 8), it surpassed Civil War to
become the biggest film of the year. It dropped out of the top ten in its eighth
week.

Although the film was finally overtaken by The Secret Life of Pets (and The
Legend of Tarzan in second place) in its fourth weekend, it nevertheless passed
The Lion King to become the highest-grossing Disney animated film of all time in
the same weekend, surpassing the latter which held the record for 15
non-consecutive years. In just 30 days, it overtook Shrek 2 ($441.2 million) to
become the highest-grossing animated film of all time, breaking the latter's
record of 12 years. Four days later, on July 20, it became the first ever
animated film in cinematic history to cross the $450 million mark.

As with its predecessor Finding Nemo, the studio expanded the theater count for
the film during the Labor Day weekend from 345 theaters to 2,075 theaters, an
addition of 1,730 theaters. In 2003, Nemo was expanded from 838 sites to 1,053
locations.

It became the second highest-grossing film of 2016 (behind Rogue One), the
highest-grossing Pixar film, the highest-grossing Walt Disney Pictures release,
the highest-grossing Disney animated film, the highest-grossing animated film
overall, and the eighth highest-grossing film of all time.

Internationally, Finding Dory received a staggered release in a span of four
months from June to September, with Germany being the last country. This was
done in order take advantage of key holidays and competitive dates around the
world. It was released across 29 countries—which is 32% of its entire
international release territories—the same weekend as its U.S. premiere. It made
an estimated $50.7 million to take the No. 1 spot at the international box
office. In its second weekend, it added $38.7 million from 37 markets, falling
in third place behind Independence Day: Resurgence and Now You See Me 2. In the
same weekend along with its $73 million take in North America, the film helped
Pixar cross the $10 billion mark worldwide since Toy Story (1995). By its fourth
weekend, the animated film helped Disney push past the $3 billion mark
internationally and $5 billion globally.

It had the biggest opening for an animated film in Brazil ($7.1 million) and the
Netherlands ($2.1 million), and the biggest of all time for a Disney animated or
Pixar film in Australia ($7.7 million), the Philippines ($2.1 million),
Singapore ($1.3 million), India ($1 million), Indonesia, Peru and Central
America, and in Russia it opened with $3.2 million, and the second biggest in
the United Kingdom and Ireland ($10.7 million), Mexico ($9.4 million) and
Argentina ($3.5 million), and that's despite amidst the latter country's Copa
America soccer match, and Colombia ($2.1 million), behind Monsters University.
In the UK and Ireland, the film recorded the second biggest animated opening of
the year with £8.1 million ($10.7 million) from 580 theaters, behind only The
Secret Life of Pets. However, if previews are excluded, Finding Dory is ahead.
Moreover, it also posted the second biggest Disney/Pixar opening, behind only
Toy Story 3 (fourth biggest if previews are included), and the seventh biggest
animated opening of all time overall based on pure Friday-to-Sunday gross alone.
It added an additional 43 theaters in its second weekend, after which it added
another £3.98 million ($5.1 million) at the weekend, thereby passing the £20
million mark in just 10 days (among Pixar films, only Toy Story 3 reached £20
million faster). It made an impressive £8.15 million during weekdays, from
Monday to Thursday resulting in a £2.03 million daily average gross. According
to The Guardian, this was because of the school holidays that prevailed on the
weekdays. Otherwise, family films earn the vast majority of their takings on
Saturday and Sunday, and showtimes typically reduce on weekdays. It returned to
the top of the box office in its fourth weekend and went on to become the
highest-grossing film of the summer this year. In Brazil, in addition to
recording the biggest Disney/Pixar opening ever, almost twice the previous
record held by The Good Dinosaur, it also set a new record for an all-time
animated opening, on par with Minions in local currency. In South Korea, it had
the biggest opening for a Pixar film with $7.1 million, which is also the second
biggest for a Disney animated film, behind Frozen. In Japan, the film had a
two-day weekend opening of $7 million on Saturday and Sunday from 511 screens on
571,000 admissions. For the entire three-day holiday weekend, including Marine
Day on Monday July 18, the film earned $11 million on 922,000 admissions. This
made it the top western release of the weekend and the biggest foreign opening
weekend in the country so far of this year. It had further number-one openings
in Spain ($4.9 million), France ($4.7 million), Hong Kong ($1.9 million; $2.8
million including previews), Taiwan ($1.9 million), Sweden, Norway and Denmark.
It topped the box office in the Netherlands for three and in Spain and Australia
for four consecutive weekends. In Italy, it scored the biggest animated opening
of the year with $5.8 million.

In China, where Pixar films have been struggling to find broad audiences and
accrue lucrative revenues, the film was projected to make around $30 million in
its opening weekend. The film ended up grossing $17.7 million—the highest Pixar
opening in the country's history—debuting in second place behind Warcraft. It
surpassed Monsters University in just seven days to become the biggest Pixar
film there with $38.1 million. It opened in Germany—its last market—on September
29, where the film delivered a robust opening of $8.4 million, the biggest for
any film of 2016 in the country. The film continued to benefit from German Unity
Day on October 3. It went on to top the box office there for three straight
weekends and even tying with Inferno in its third weekend.

It is now the highest-grossing Disney animated or Pixar film in Australia (where
it is also the second highest-grossing animated film of all time behind Shrek
2), Bolivia, Brazil, Central America, Colombia, India, Indonesia, New Zealand,
Peru, the Philippines, and Trinidad. It also became the second highest-grossing
Pixar release of all time in South Korea behind Inside Out. Elsewhere, the
biggest markets in terms of total earnings were Japan ($65.9 million), followed
by the UK ($55 million), China ($38.4 million), Australia ($36.2 million) and
Brazil ($34.5 million).

Finding Dory received positive reviews from critics. On review aggregator
website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 94% based on 270
reviews and an average rating of 7.6/10. The site's critical consensus reads,
"Funny, poignant, and thought-provoking, Finding Dory delivers a beautifully
animated adventure that adds another entertaining chapter to its predecessor's
classic story." On Metacritic, the film has a score of 77 out of 100, based on
48 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews." Audiences polled by
CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale.

Mike Ryan of Uproxx gave the film a positive review, saying: "I never thought I
wanted a sequel to Finding Nemo, but here we are and I'm pretty happy it exists.
And, for me, it was a more emotional experience than the first film. Finding
Dory got me – it made me cry." A.O. Scott of The New York Times said that while
the film lacks "dazzling originality," he overall wrote, "it more than makes up
for in warmth, charm and good humor." In his review for Variety, Owen Gleiberman
wrote, "It's a film that spills over with laughs (most of them good, a few of
them shticky) and tears (all of them earned), supporting characters who are
meant to slay us (and mostly do) with their irascible sharp tongues, and
dizzyingly extended flights of physical comedy." Joe Morgenstern of The Wall
Street Journal said that "Finding Dory can be touching, sweet and tender, but
it's compulsively, preposterously and steadfastly funny." Peter Travers of
Rolling Stone gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four and said that the
film "brims with humor, heart and animation miracles," despite lacking "the
fresh surprise of its predecessor."

Conservationists warned that, very much like Finding Nemo, the film could lead
to uninformed customers buying blue tangs for home aquariums. Blue tangs cannot
be bred in captivity and have to be caught in the wild. They are related to
surgeonfish and exhibit razor-sharp spines on both sides of the tail that can
inflict formidable wounds.

While promoting the film, actress Ellen DeGeneres reminded audiences that Nemo
and Dory’s real-life home, the Great Barrier Reef, is under enormous threat,
mostly due to coral bleaching, a process induced by climate change, which has
killed coral reefs on an enormous scale.

In June 2016, director Andrew Stanton talked about the possibility of a sequel,
saying that he would never exclude it because of the introduction of new
characters, citing the Toy Story films as guides for how to expand a world
through sequels.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theresa_May

Theresa Mary May (née Brasier; born 1 October 1956) is the Prime Minister of the
United Kingdom and Leader of the Conservative Party, having served as both since
July 2016. She has been the Member of Parliament (MP) for Maidenhead since 1997.
May identifies as a one-nation conservative and has been characterised as a
liberal conservative. She is the second female Prime Minister and Conservative
Party leader after Margaret Thatcher.

The daughter of a vicar, May grew up in Oxfordshire. From 1977 until 1983, she
worked for the Bank of England, and from 1985 until 1997 at the Association for
Payment Clearing Services, also serving as a councillor for Durnsford in Merton.
After unsuccessful attempts to be elected to the House of Commons in 1992 and
1994, she was elected as the MP for Maidenhead in the 1997 general election.
From 1999 to 2010, May held a number of roles in the Shadow Cabinets of William
Hague, Iain Duncan Smith, Michael Howard and David Cameron, including Shadow
Transport Secretary and Shadow Work and Pensions Secretary. She was also
Chairman of the Conservative Party from 2002 to 2003.

After the formation of a coalition government following the 2010 general
election, May was appointed Home Secretary and Minister for Women and
Equalities, giving up the latter role in 2012. Reappointed after the
Conservative victory in the 2015 general election, she went on to become the
longest-serving Home Secretary since James Chuter Ede over 60 years previously.
During her tenure she pursued reform of the Police Federation, implemented a
harder line on drugs policy including the banning of khat, oversaw the
introduction of elected Police and Crime Commissioners, the deportation of Abu
Qatada, the creation of the National Crime Agency and brought in additional
restrictions on immigration.

After David Cameron announced his resignation as Prime Minister on 24 June 2016
following the EU referendum, May announced her candidacy for the leadership of
the Conservative Party and quickly emerged as the front-runner. She won the
first and second ballot of Conservative MPs by a significant margin and was due
to face a vote of Conservative Party members in a contest with Andrea Leadsom.
Leadsom's withdrawal from the election on 11 July led to May's appointment as
leader the same day. She was appointed Prime Minister two days later. As Prime
Minister, May's focus has primarily been on withdrawing the UK from the European
Union.

Born on 1 October 1956 in Eastbourne, Sussex, May is the only child of Zaidee
Mary (née Barnes; 1928–1982) and Hubert Brasier (1917–1981). Her father was a
Church of England clergyman who was chaplain of an Eastbourne hospital. He later
became vicar of Enstone with Heythrop and finally of St Mary's at Wheatley, to
the east of Oxford. May's mother was a strong supporter of the Conservative
Party. At the age of 25, she lost both parents: her father died in a car
accident, while her mother succumbed to multiple sclerosis some months later.

May was educated primarily in the state sector but with a short spell at an
independent Catholic school. She initially attended Heythrop Primary School, a
state school in Heythrop, followed by St. Juliana's Convent School for Girls, a
Roman Catholic independent school in Begbroke, which closed in 1984.

At the age of 13, May won a place at the former Holton Park Girls' Grammar
School, a state school in Wheatley. During her time as a pupil, the Oxfordshire
education system was reorganised and the school became the new Wheatley Park
Comprehensive School. May then attended the University of Oxford where she read
geography at St Hugh's College, graduating with a second class BA degree in
1977.

Between 1977 and 1983 May worked at the Bank of England, and from 1985 to 1997
as a financial consultant and senior advisor in International Affairs at the
Association for Payment Clearing Services. Both May's parents died during this
period, her father in a car accident in 1981 and her mother of multiple
sclerosis the year after.

May served as a councillor for Durnsford ward on the London Borough of Merton
from 1986 to 1994, where she was Chairman of Education (1988–90) and Deputy
Group Leader and Housing Spokesman (1992–94). In the 1992 general election May
stood unsuccessfully for the safe Labour seat of North West Durham, coming
second to incumbent MP Hilary Armstrong by 12,747 votes (27.6%) to 26,734
(57.8%), with future Liberal Democrat leader Tim Farron coming third. May then
stood at the 1994 Barking by-election, which was prompted by the death of Labour
MP Jo Richardson. The seat had been continuously held by Labour since it was
created in 1945 and Labour candidate Margaret Hodge was expected to win easily,
which she did, with 13,704 votes (72.1%). May came a distant third with 1,976
votes (10.4%). Ahead of the 1997 general election, May was selected as the
Conservative candidate for Maidenhead, a new seat which was created from parts
of the seats of Windsor and Maidenhead and Wokingham. She was elected with
25,344 votes (49.8%), almost double the total of second-placed Andrew Terence
Ketteringham of the Liberal Democrats, who took 13,363 votes (26.3%).

Having entered Parliament, May became a member of William Hague's front-bench
Opposition team, as Shadow Spokesman for Schools, Disabled People and Women
(1998 – June 1999). She became the first of the 1997 MPs to enter the Shadow
Cabinet when in 1999 she was appointed Shadow Education and Employment
Secretary. After the 2001 election the new Conservative leader Iain Duncan Smith
kept her in the Shadow Cabinet, moving her to the Transport portfolio.

May was appointed the first female Chairman of the Conservative Party in July
2002. During her speech at the 2002 Conservative Party Conference, she explained
why, in her view, her party must change: "you know what people call us: the
Nasty Party". In 2003, she was sworn of the Privy Council and appointed Shadow
Secretary of State for Transport after Michael Howard's election as Conservative
Party and Opposition Leader in November that year.

In June 2004 she was moved to become Shadow Secretary of State for the Family.
Following the 2005 general election she was also made Shadow Secretary of State
for Culture, Media and Sport. David Cameron appointed her Shadow Leader of the
House of Commons in December 2005 after his accession to the leadership. In
January 2009 May was made Shadow Secretary of State for Work and Pensions.

On 6 May 2010, May was re-elected MP for Maidenhead with an increased majority
of 16,769 – 60 per cent of the vote. This followed an earlier failed attempt to
unseat her in 2005 as one of the Liberal Democrats' leading
"decapitation-strategy" targets.

On 12 May 2010, when May was appointed Home Secretary and Minister for Women and
Equality by Prime Minister David Cameron as part of his first Cabinet, she
became the fourth woman to hold one of the British Great Offices of State, after
(in order of seniority) Margaret Thatcher (Prime Minister), Margaret Beckett
(Foreign Secretary) and Jacqui Smith (Home Secretary). As Home Secretary, May
was also a member of the National Security Council. She is the longest-serving
Home Secretary for over 60 years, since James Chuter Ede who served over six
years and two months from August 1945 to October 1951. May's appointment as Home
Secretary was somewhat unexpected, as Chris Grayling had served as shadow Home
Secretary in opposition.

May's debut as Home Secretary involved overturning several of the previous
Labour government's measures on data collection and surveillance in England and
Wales. By way of a government bill which became the Identity Documents Act 2010,
she brought about the abolition of the Labour government's National Identity
Card and database scheme and reformed the regulations on the retention of DNA
samples for suspects and controls on the use of CCTV cameras. In May 2010, May
announced the adjournment of the deportation to the United States of alleged
computer hacker Gary McKinnon. She also suspended the registration scheme for
carers of children and vulnerable people, with May saying that the measures were
"draconian. You were assumed to be guilty until you were proven innocent, and
told you were able to work with children." On 4 August 2010 it was reported that
May was scrapping the former Labour government's proposed "go orders" scheme to
protect women from domestic violence by banning abusers from the victim's home.

In June 2010, May faced her first major national security incident as Home
Secretary with the Cumbria shootings. She delivered her first major speech in
the House of Commons as Home Secretary in a statement on this incident, later
visiting the victims with the Prime Minister. Also in June 2010, May banned the
Indian Muslim preacher Zakir Naik from entering the United Kingdom. According to
The Telegraph, a Home Office official who disagreed with this decision was
suspended. In late June 2010, May announced plans for a temporary cap on UK
visas for non-EU migrants. The move raised concerns about the impact on the
British economy.

In August 2013 May supported the detention of David Miranda, partner of Guardian
journalist Glenn Greenwald under the Terrorism Act 2000, saying that critics of
the Metropolitan Police action needed to "think about what they are condoning".
Lib Dem peer and former Director of Public Prosecutions Ken Macdonald accused
May of an "ugly and unhelpful" attempt to implicate those who were concerned
about the police action of "condoning terrorism". The High Court subsequently
acknowledged there were "indirect implications for press freedom" but ruled the
detention legal.

May also championed legislation popularly dubbed the Snooper's Charter,
requiring internet and mobile service providers to keep records of internet
usage, voice calls, messages and email for up to a year in case police requested
access to the records whilst investigating a crime. The Liberal Democrats had
blocked the first attempt, but after the Conservative Party obtained a majority
in the 2015 general election May announced a new Draft Investigatory Powers Bill
similar to the Draft Communications Data Bill, although with more limited powers
and additional oversight.

Speaking at the Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO) conference in June
2010, May announced radical cuts to the Home Office budget, likely to lead to a
reduction in police numbers. In July 2010, May presented the House of Commons
with proposals for a fundamental review of the previous Labour government's
security and counter-terrorism legislation, including "stop and search" powers,
and her intention to review the 28-day limit on detaining terrorist suspects
without charge.

In July 2010, May announced a package of reforms to policing in England and
Wales in the House of Commons. The previous Labour Government's central crime
agency, Soca (Serious Organised Crime Agency), was to be replaced by a new
National Crime Agency. In common with the Conservative Party 2010 general
election manifesto's flagship proposal for a "Big Society" based on voluntary
action, May also proposed increasing the role of civilian "reservists" for crime
control. The reforms were rejected by the Opposition Labour Party.

Following the actions of some members of Black Bloc in vandalising allegedly
tax-avoiding shops and businesses on the day of the March 2011 TUC march, the
Home Secretary unveiled reforms curbing the right to protest, including giving
police extra powers to remove masked individuals and to police social networking
sites to prevent illegal protest without police consent or notification.

In July 2013, May welcomed the fact that crime had fallen by more than ten
percent under the coalition government, while still being able to make savings.
She said that this was partly due to the government removing red tape and
scrapping targets to allow the police to concentrate on crime fighting.

In 2014, May delivered a well-known speech to the Police Federation, in which
she criticised many aspects of the culture of the police force. In the speech,
she said:

On 9 December 2010, in the wake of violent student demonstrations in central
London against increases to higher-education tuition fees, May praised the
actions of the police in controlling the demonstrations but was described by The
Daily Telegraph as "under growing political pressure" due to her handling of the
protests.

In December 2010, May declared that deployment of water cannon by police forces
in mainland Britain was an operational decision which had been "resisted until
now by senior police officers." She rejected their use following the widespread
rioting in Summer 2011 and said: "the way we police in Britain is not through
use of water cannon. The way we police in Britain is through consent of
communities." May said: "I condemn utterly the violence in Tottenham.... Such
disregard for public safety and property will not be tolerated, and the
Metropolitan Police have my full support in restoring order."

In the aftermath of the riots May urged the identification of as many as
possible of the young criminals involved. She said: "when I was in Manchester
last week, the issue was raised to me about the anonymity of juveniles who are
found guilty of crimes of this sort. The Crown Prosecution Service is to order
prosecutors to apply for anonymity to be lifted in any youth case they think is
in the public interest. The law currently protects the identity of any suspect
under the age of 18, even if they are convicted, but it also allows for an
application to have such restrictions lifted, if deemed appropriate." May added
that "what I've asked for is that CPS guidance should go to prosecutors to say
that where possible, they should be asking for the anonymity of juveniles who
are found guilty of criminal activity to be lifted."

In July 2010, May proposed to review the previous Labour Government's
anti-social behaviour legislation signalling the abolition of the "Anti-Social
Behaviour Order" (ASBO). She identified the policy's high level of failure with
almost half of ASBOs breached between 2000 and 2008, leading to "fast-track"
criminal convictions. May proposed a less punitive, community-based approach to
tackling social disorder. May suggested that anti-social behaviour policy "must
be turned on its head", reversing the ASBO's role as the flagship crime control
policy legislation under Labour. Former Labour Home Secretaries David Blunkett
(who introduced ASBOs) and Alan Johnson expressed their disapproval of the
proposals.

In July 2013, May decided to ban the stimulant khat, against the advice of the
Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs (ACMD). The council reached the
conclusion that there was "insufficient evidence" it caused health problems.
Explaining the change in the classification May said: "The decision to bring
khat under control is finely balanced and takes into account the expert
scientific advice and these broader concerns", and pointed out that the product
had already been banned in the majority of other EU member states, as well as
most of the G8 countries including Canada and the US. A report on khat use by
the ACMD published in January 2013 had noted the product had been associated
with "acute psychotic episodes", "chronic liver disease" and family breakdown.
However, it concluded that there is no risk of harm for most users, and
recommended that khat remain uncontrolled due to lack of evidence for these
associations.

Liberal Democrat minister Norman Baker accused May of suppressing proposals to
treat rather than prosecute minor drug offenders from a report into drug policy
commissioned by the Home Office. The Home Office denied that its officials had
considered this as part of their strategy. Baker cited difficulties in working
with May as the reason for his resignation from the Home Office in the run-up to
the 2015 general election.

In 2010, May promised to bring the level of net migration down to less than
100,000. In February 2015, The Independent reported, "The Office for National
Statistics (ONS) announced a net flow of 298,000 migrants to the UK in the 12
months to September 2014 – up from 210,000 in the previous year." In total,
624,000 people migrated to the UK in the year ending September 2014 and 327,000
left in the same period. Statistics showed "significant increases in migration
among both non-EU citizens – up 49,000 to 292,000 – and EU citizens, which rose
by 43,000 to 251,000."

May rejected the European Union's proposal of compulsory refugee quotas. She
said that it was important to help people living in war-zone regions and refugee
camps but "not the ones who are strong and rich enough to come to Europe". In
May 2016, The Daily Telegraph reported that she had tried to save £4m by
rejecting an intelligence project to use aircraft surveillance to detect illegal
immigrant boats.

In June 2012, May, as Home Secretary, announced to Parliament that new
restrictions would be introduced, intended to reduce the number of non-European
Economic Area family migrants. The changes were mostly intended to apply to new
applicants after 9 July 2012. The new rules came into effect from 9 July 2012
allowing only those British citizens earning more than £18,600 to bring their
spouse or their child to live with them in the UK. This figure would rise
significantly in cases where visa applications are also made for children. They
also increased the current two-year probationary period for partners to five
years. The rules also prevent any adult and elderly dependents from settling in
the UK unless they can demonstrate that, as a result of age, illness or
disability, they require a level of long-term personal care that can only be
provided by a relative in the UK.

An MP,[who?] who was concerned about this, addressed May in Parliament as to
whether she had examined the impact on communities and families on modest
incomes, but he received no direct response. The human rights group Liberty
concluded that the new rules showed scant regard to the impact they would have
on genuine families. The All-Party Parliamentary Group on Migration conducted an
evidence based inquiry into the impact of the rules and concluded in their
report that the rules were causing very young children to be separated from
their parents and could exile British citizens from the UK.

At the Conservative Party Conference in October 2011, while arguing that the
Human Rights Act needed to be amended, May gave the example of a foreign
national who the Courts ruled was allowed to remain in the UK, "because – and I
am not making this up – he had a pet cat". In response, the Royal Courts of
Justice issued a statement, denying that this was the reason for the tribunal's
decision in that case, and stating that the real reason was that he was in a
genuine relationship with a British partner, and owning a pet cat was simply one
of many pieces of evidence given to show that the relationship was "genuine".
The Home Office had failed to apply its own rules for dealing with unmarried
partners of people settled in the UK. Amnesty International said May's comments
only fuelled "myths and misconceptions" about the Human Rights Act and Justice
Secretary Kenneth Clarke subsequently called May's comments "laughable and
childlike."

In June 2012, May was found in contempt of court by Judge Barry Cotter, and
stood accused of "totally unacceptable and regrettable behaviour", being said to
have shown complete disregard for a legal agreement to free an Algerian from a
UK Immigration Detention Centre. As she eventually allowed the prisoner to be
freed, May avoided further sanctions including fines or imprisonment.

May responded to a Supreme Court decision in November 2013 to overturn her
predecessor Jacqui Smith's revocation of Iraqi-born terror suspect Al Jedda's
British citizenship by ordering it to be revoked for a second time, making him
the first person to be stripped twice of British citizenship.

May was accused by Lord Roberts of being willing to allow someone to die "to
score a political point" over the deportation of mentally ill Nigerian man Isa
Muazu. According to Muazu's solicitor, May had arranged for the asylum seeker,
who was said to be "near death" after a 100-day hunger strike, to be deported by
a chartered private jet. To strengthen the Home Office's tough stance an "end of
life" plan was reportedly offered to Muazu, who was one of a number of hunger
strikers at the Harmondsworth Immigration Removal Centre.

On 7 July 2013, Abu Qatada, a radical cleric arrested in 2002, was deported to
Jordan after a decade-long battle that had cost the nation £1.7 million in legal
fees, and numerous prior Home Secretaries had been unable to resolve. The
deportation was the result of a treaty negotiated by May in April 2013, under
which Jordan agreed to give Qatada a fair trial, by not using evidence that may
have been obtained through torture against him.

May has frequently pointed to Qatada's deportation as a triumph, guaranteeing in
September 2013 that "he will not be returning to the UK", and declaring in her
2016 leadership campaign announcement that she was told that she "couldn't
deport Abu Qatada" but that she "flew to Jordan and negotiated the treaty that
got him out of Britain for good". The Qatada deportation also shaped May's views
on the European Convention on Human Rights and European Court of Human Rights,
saying that they had "moved the goalposts" and had a "crazy interpretation of
our human rights laws", as a result, May has since campaigned against the
institutions, saying that British withdrawal from them should be considered.

In August 2013, the Home Office engaged in an advertising campaign directed at
illegal immigrants. The advertisements, in the form of mobile advertising
hoardings on the back of lorries, told illegal immigrants to "go home or face
arrest", with an image of a person in handcuffs, and were deployed in six London
boroughs with substantial ethnic minority populations. They were widely
criticized as creating a hostile atmosphere for members of ethnic minority
groups, The shadow Home Secretary, Yvette Cooper, described their language as
being reminiscent of that used by the National Front in the 1970s. An
adjudication by the Advertising Standards Authority was followed by the
advertisements being withdrawn.

In mid 2014, the Passport Office faced a backlog in developing processing
passport applications, with around 30,000 applications hit by delays. David
Cameron suggested this had come about due to the Passport Office's receiving an
"above normal" 300,000-rise in applications. It was revealed, however, that May
had been warned the year before, in July 2013, that a surge of 350,000 extra
applications could occur owing to the closure of processing overseas under
Chancellor Osborne's programme of cuts. Around £674,000 was paid to staff who
helped clear the backlog.

In June 2014, an inflamed public argument arose between Home Office and
Education Ministers about responsibility for alleged extremism in Birmingham
schools. Prime Minister David Cameron intervened to resolve the row, insisting
that May sack her Special Advisor Fiona Cunningham (now Hill) for releasing on
May's website a confidential letter to May's colleagues, and that Michael Gove,
the Education Secretary, apologise to the Home Office's head of Security and
Counter-Terrorism, Charles Farr, for uncomplimentary briefings of him appearing
on the front page of The Times.

May held the office of Minister for Women and Equality in parallel to her office
of Home Secretary from 2010 to September 2012, when this role was taken over by
Maria Miller.

May's appointment as Minister for Women and Equality was criticised by some
members of the LGBT rights movement, because she had voted against lowering the
age of consent (in 1998) and against greater adoption rights for homosexuals (in
2002), though she had voted in favour of civil partnerships. May later stated,
during an appearance on the BBC's Question Time, that she had "changed her mind"
on gay adoption. Writing for PinkNews in June 2010, May clarified her proposals
for improving LGBT rights including measures to tackle homophobia in sport,
advocating British society's need for "cultural change".

On 2 July 2010, May stated she would be supporting the previous Labour
Government's Anti-Discrimination Laws enshrined in the Equality Act 2010 despite
having opposed it before. The Equality Act came into effect in England, Wales
and Scotland on 1 October 2010. She did however announce that a clause she
dubbed "Harman's Law" which would have required public bodies to consider how
they can reduce socio-economic inequalities when making decisions about spending
and services would be scrapped on the grounds that it was "unworkable".

On 30 June 2016, May announced her candidacy for the leadership of the
Conservative Party to replace David Cameron, who resigned following the outcome
of the European Union membership referendum in which 52% of voters voted in
favour of leaving the EU. May emphasised the need for unity within the party
regardless of positions on leaving the EU, saying she could bring "strong
leadership" and a "positive vision" for the country's future. Despite having
backed a vote to remain in the EU, she insisted that there would be no second
referendum, saying: "The campaign was fought... and the public gave their
verdict. There must be no attempts to remain inside the EU, no attempts to
rejoin it through the back door... Brexit means Brexit". An opinion poll that
day found 47% of people choosing May as their preferred candidate to be Prime
Minister.

May's supporters included a number of Cabinet ministers, such as Amber Rudd,
Chris Grayling, Justine Greening, Jeremy Hunt, Michael Fallon and Patrick
McLoughlin. She won the first round of voting on 5 July, receiving support from
165 MPs, with rivals Andrea Leadsom receiving 66 votes and Michael Gove 48.
After the results were announced, May said she was "pleased" and "grateful" for
the support of other MPs and confirmed that she wanted to unite the party and
the UK, to negotiate the "best possible deal as we leave the EU", and to "make
Britain work for everyone". The two candidates with the fewest votes, Liam Fox
and Stephen Crabb, immediately announced their support for May. May came in
first place in the second ballot on 7 July with an overwhelming majority of 199
MPs, compared with 84 for Leadsom and 46 for Gove, who was eliminated.
Afterwards, May stated that she was delighted with her support among MPs, and
she progressed to a vote of the Conservative Party membership against Leadsom.

On 11 July, Leadsom announced her withdrawal from the leadership contest hours
after May had made her first official campaign speech, saying her lack of
support amongst Conservative MPs compared to May would be too great a hindrance
to becoming a credible Prime Minister. As the sole remaining candidate, May was
formally declared Leader of the Conservative Party that evening.

On 13 July 2016, two days after becoming Leader of the Conservative Party, May
was appointed Prime Minister by Queen Elizabeth II, becoming only the second
female British Prime Minister after Margaret Thatcher, and the first female
British Prime Minister of the 21st century. Addressing the world's media outside
10 Downing Street, May said that she was "honoured and humbled" to become Prime
Minister. On becoming Prime Minister, May became the first woman to have held
two of the Great Offices of State.

Responding to some calls for an early general election, "sources close to Mrs
May" said there was no need for such an election. In a speech after her
appointment, May emphasised the term "Unionist" in the name of the Conservative
Party, reminding all of "the precious, precious bond between England, Scotland,
Wales and Northern Ireland." By 15 July, May had travelled to Edinburgh to meet
with First Minister Nicola Sturgeon to reinforce the bond between Scotland and
the rest of the United Kingdom. "I'm coming here to show my commitment to
preserving this special union that has endured for centuries," she explained.

May's first Cabinet appointment was described by Reuters as "one of the most
sweeping government reshuffles for decades", and called "a brutal cull" by The
Daily Telegraph. Nine of Cameron's ministers, including several prominent
members, were sacked or resigned from their posts. The early appointments were
interpreted both as an effort to reunite the Conservative Party in the wake of
the UK's vote to leave the EU and as "a shift to the right," according to The
Guardian. ITV's Political Editor Robert Peston commented: "Her rhetoric is more
left-wing than Cameron's was, her cabinet is more right-wing than his was."
Although May had supported remaining in the EU, she appointed several of the
most prominent advocates of Brexit to key Cabinet positions responsible for
negotiating the United Kingdom withdrawal from the European Union, including
Boris Johnson as Foreign Secretary, David Davis as Brexit Secretary, and Liam
Fox as International Trade Secretary, the latter two being new positions. Other
key appointees included Amber Rudd as Home Secretary and Philip Hammond as
Chancellor of the Exchequer.

The May Ministry delayed the final approval for the Hinkley Point C nuclear
power station in July 2016, a project which May had objected to when she was
Home Secretary. Her political adviser Nick Timothy wrote an article in 2015 to
oppose China's involvement in sensitive sectors. He said that the government was
"selling our national security to China" without rational concerns and "the
Government seems intent on ignoring the evidence and presumably the advice of
the security and intelligence agencies."

In July 2016, when George Kerevan asked her whether she would be prepared to
authorise the killing of a hundred thousand innocent persons by a nuclear
strike; during the "Trident debate" inside the House of Commons, May said "Yes.
And I have to say to the honourable gentleman: the whole point of a deterrent is
that our enemies need to know that we would be prepared to use it. Unlike some
suggestions that we could have a nuclear deterrent but not actually be willing
to use it, which come from the Labour Party frontbench."

On 20 July, May attended her first Prime Minister's Questions since taking
office, then afterwards made her first overseas trip as prime minister, visiting
Berlin for talks with German Chancellor Angela Merkel. During the visit, May
said that she would not trigger Article 50 of the Treaty of Lisbon–the process
for withdrawing from the European Union–before 2017, suggesting it would take
time for the UK to negotiate a "sensible and orderly departure" from the EU.
However, although Merkel said it was right for the UK to "take a moment" before
beginning the process, she urged May to provide more clarity on a timetable for
negotiations. Shortly before travelling to Berlin, May had also announced that
in the wake of the referendum, Britain would relinquish the presidency of the
Council of the European Union, which passes between member states every six
months on a rotation basis, and that the UK had been scheduled to hold in the
second half of 2017.

May supported the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen and defended selling
arms to Saudi Arabia, which is accused of committing war crimes in Yemen,
insisting that Britain's close relationship with Saudi Arabia was "helping keep
people on the streets of Britain safe".

On 21 January 2017, following the inauguration of Donald Trump as US President,
the White House announced that May would meet the President on 27 January,
making her the first foreign leader to meet Trump since he took office on 20
January. In a joint press conference, May indicated an interest in increased
trade between the United States and the United Kingdom. She also affirmed a
desire to maintain an American involvement in NATO. May was criticised by
members of major parties, including her own, for refusing to condemn Trump's
Executive Order 13769, as well as for inviting Trump to a state visit with Queen
Elizabeth II.

In January 2017, when it came to light that a Trident test had malfunctioned in
June 2016, May refused to confirm whether she knew about the incident when she
addressed parliament.

May had a high approval rating during her first week as Prime Minister. The
results of an Ipsos MORI survey released on 14 July indicated that 55 percent of
those surveyed believed that May was a suitable PM while only 23 percent
believed that the Opposition Leader Jeremy Corbyn would make a good Prime
Minister.

May has identified herself with the One Nation Conservative position within her
party.

Since coming into prominence as a front-bench politician, May's public image has
divided media opinion, especially from some in the traditionalist right-wing
press. Commenting on May's debut as Home Secretary, Anne Perkins of The Guardian
observed that "she'll be nobody's stooge", while Cristina Odone of The Daily
Telegraph predicted her to be "the rising star" of the Coalition Government.
Allegra Stratton, then with The Guardian, praised May as showing managerial
acumen.

Describing her as a liberal Conservative, the Financial Times characterised May
as a "non-ideological politician with a ruthless streak who gets on with the
job", in doing so comparing her to German Chancellor Angela Merkel. Conversely,
in The Independent, Rebecca Glover of the Policy Innovation Research Unit
contrasted May to Boris Johnson, claiming that she was "staunchly more
conservative, more anti-immigration, and more isolationist" than he.

During her leadership campaign, May said that "We need an economy that works for
everyone", pledging to crack down on executive pay by making shareholders' votes
binding rather than advisory and to put workers onto company boards, policies
that The Guardian describes as going further than the Labour Party's 2015
general election manifesto.

After she became Prime Minister, May's first speech espoused the left, with a
promise to combat the "burning injustice" in British society and to create a
union "between all of our citizens" and promising to be an advocate for the
"ordinary working-class family" and not for the affluent in the UK. "The
government I lead will be driven not by the interests of the privileged few but
by yours. We will do everything we can to give you more control over your lives.
... When we take the big calls, we’ll think not of the powerful, but you. When
we pass new laws we’ll listen not to the mighty, but to you. When it comes to
taxes we’ll prioritise not the wealthy but you."

In May 2012, May expressed support for the introduction of same-sex marriage by
recording a video for the Out4Marriage campaign. May became one of the first
high-profile Conservative MPs to pledge personal support for same-sex marriage.
She explained, "I believe if two people care for each other, if they love each
other, if they want to commit to each other... then they should be able to get
married and marriage should be for everyone".

May supported the UK remaining in the EU during the 2016 referendum campaign,
but did not campaign extensively in the referendum and criticised aspects of the
EU in a speech. It was speculated by political journalists that May had sought
to minimise her involvement in the debate to strengthen her position as a future
candidate for the Conservative party leadership.

May also said Britain was more secure as part of the EU due to the European
arrest warrant and Europe wide information sharing among other factors. She
said, "There are definitely things we can do as members of the European Union
that I think keep us more safe".

May's public reticence during the referendum campaign resulted in tensions with
David Cameron and his pro-EU team Following the referendum and her election as
party leader, May signalled that she would support full withdrawal from the EU
and prioritise immigration controls over remaining within the Single Market,
leading some to contrast this with her earlier remarks on the earlier economic
arguments. Lib Dem leader, Tim Farron said, it was "disappointing that Theresa
May lacked the political courage to warn the public as she did a bunch of
bankers in private about the devastating economic effects of Brexit. More
disappointing is that now she is supposedly in charge, she is blithely ignoring
her own warnings and is prepared to inflict an act of monumental self-harm on
the UK economy by pulling Britain out of the single market." Phil Wilson for the
'Open Britain' group said, "It's good to know that privately Theresa May thinks
what many of us have been saying publicly for a long time, leaving the single
market would be bad for businesses and for our economy. Now she is prime
minister, Theresa May is in an unrivalled position to act on her previous
concerns, starting by putting membership of the single market at the heart of
her government's negotiating position."

May has been married to Philip May, an investment banker currently employed by
Capital International, since 6 September 1980; the couple have no children. It
is widely believed that former Prime Minister of Pakistan Benazir Bhutto
introduced the two during their time at Oxford. May has expressed regret that
she and her husband were not able to have children. The Mays are passionate
hikers, and they regularly spend their holidays hiking in the Swiss Alps. May is
also a passionate cricket fan, claiming Geoffrey Boycott was one of her sporting
heroes.

May is a member of the Church of England and regularly worships at church on
Sunday. The daughter of an Anglican priest, the Reverend Hubert Brasier, May has
said that her Christian faith "is part of me. It is part of who I am and
therefore how I approach things".

May is known for a love of fashion and in particular distinctive shoes, wearing
leopard-print shoes at her 'Nasty Party' speech in 2002, as well as her final
Cabinet meeting as Home Secretary in 2016. On Desert Island Discs in 2014 she
chose a subscription to Vogue as her luxury item. However she has been critical
of the media focusing on her fashion instead of her achievements as a
politician.

May was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus of type 1 in November 2012. She is
treated with daily insulin injections.

Her parliamentary expenses have been "modest" in recent years (about £15,000
from 2005 to 2009).

Prior to and since her appointment to Government, May actively supports a
variety of campaigns on policy issues in her constituency and at the national
level of politics. She has spoken at the Fawcett Society promoting the
cross-party issue of gender equality. May was nominated as one of the Society's
Inspiring Women of 2006.

She is the Patron of Reading University Conservative Association, the largest
political student group in Berkshire (the county of her Maidenhead
constituency). In February 2013, BBC Radio 4's Woman's Hour already described
her as Britain's second-most powerful woman after Queen Elizabeth II.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isaac_Asimov

Isaac Asimov (/ˈaɪzᵻk ˈæzᵻmɒv/; born Isaak Ozimov; c. January 2, 1920 – April 6,
1992) was an American writer and professor of biochemistry at Boston University.
He was known for his works of science fiction and popular science. Asimov was a
prolific writer, and wrote or edited more than 500 books and an estimated 90,000
letters and postcards. His books have been published in 9 of the 10 major
categories of the Dewey Decimal Classification.

Asimov wrote hard science fiction and, along with Robert A. Heinlein and Arthur
C. Clarke, he was considered one of the "Big Three" science fiction writers
during his lifetime. Asimov's most famous work is the Foundation Series; his
other major series are the Galactic Empire series and the Robot series. The
Galactic Empire novels are explicitly set in earlier history of the same
fictional universe as the Foundation series. Later, beginning with Foundation's
Edge, he linked this distant future to the Robot and Spacer stories, creating a
unified "future history" for his stories much like those pioneered by Robert A.
Heinlein and previously produced by Cordwainer Smith and Poul Anderson. He wrote
hundreds of short stories, including the social science fiction "Nightfall",
which in 1964 was voted by the Science Fiction Writers of America the best short
science fiction story of all time. Asimov wrote the Lucky Starr series of
juvenile science-fiction novels using the pen name Paul French.

Asimov also wrote mysteries and fantasy, as well as much nonfiction. Most of his
popular science books explain scientific concepts in a historical way, going as
far back as possible to a time when the science in question was at its simplest
stage. He often provides nationalities, birth dates, and death dates for the
scientists he mentions, as well as etymologies and pronunciation guides for
technical terms. Examples include Guide to Science, the three-volume set
Understanding Physics, and Asimov's Chronology of Science and Discovery, as well
as works on astronomy, mathematics, history, William Shakespeare's writing, and
chemistry.

Asimov was a long-time member and vice president of Mensa International, albeit
reluctantly; he described some members of that organization as "brain-proud and
aggressive about their IQs". He took more joy in being president of the American
Humanist Association. The asteroid 5020 Asimov, a crater on the planet Mars, a
Brooklyn elementary school, and a literary award are named in his honor.

Asimov was born between October 4, 1919 and January 2, 1920 in Petrovichi near
Klimovichi, then Gomel Governorate in the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist
Republic (now Smolensk Oblast, Russia) to Anna Rachel (née Berman) and Judah
Asimov, a family of Jewish millers. His exact date of birth within that range is
unknown, but Asimov himself celebrated it on January 2. The family name derives
from a word for winter crops, in which his great-grandfather dealt. This word is
spelled озимые (ozimye) in Russian, and азімыя (azimiya) in Belarusian.
Phonetically, both words are almost identical because in Russian 'О' in the
first unstressed syllable is always pronounced as 'А'. Accordingly, his name
originally was Исаак Озимов (Isaak Ozimov) in Russian; however, he was later
known in Russia as Ayzek Azimov (Айзек Азимов), a Russian Cyrillic adaptation of
the American English pronunciation. Asimov had two younger siblings: a sister,
Marcia (born Manya, June 17, 1922 – April 2, 2011), and a brother, Stanley (July
25, 1929 – August 16, 1995), who was vice-president of New York Newsday.

His family emigrated to the United States when he was three years old. Since his
parents always spoke Yiddish and English with him, he never learned Russian, but
he remained fluent in Yiddish as well as English. Growing up in Brooklyn, New
York, Asimov taught himself to read at the age of five, and his mother got him
into first grade a year early by claiming he was born on September 7, 1919. (In
third grade he learned about the "error" and insisted on an official correction
to January 2.) Asimov wrote of his father, "My father, for all his education as
an Orthodox Jew, was not Orthodox in his heart", noting that "he didn't recite
the myriad prayers prescribed for every action, and he never made any attempt to
teach them to me". After becoming established in the U.S. his parents owned a
succession of candy stores, in which everyone in the family was expected to
work. The candy stores sold newspapers and magazines, a fact that Asimov
credited as a major influence in his lifelong love of the written word, as it
allowed him an unending supply of new reading material as a child that he could
not have otherwise afforded. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1928 at the
age of eight.

Asimov began reading science fiction pulp magazines at a young age. His father,
as a matter of principle, forbade reading the pulps, as he considered them to be
trash, but Asimov persuaded him that the science fiction magazines had "Science"
in the title, so they were educational. Around the age of 11, he began to write
his own stories, and by age 19, after he discovered science fiction fandom, he
was selling stories to the science fiction magazines. John W. Campbell, then
editor of Astounding Science Fiction, had a strong formative influence on Asimov
and eventually became a personal friend.

Asimov attended New York City public schools, including Boys High School in
Brooklyn. Graduating at 15, he went on to Seth Low Junior College, a branch of
Columbia University in Downtown Brooklyn designed to absorb some of the Jewish
and Italian-American students who applied to Columbia College, then the
institution's primary undergraduate school for men with quotas on the number of
admissions from those ethnic groups. Originally a zoology major, Asimov changed
his subject to chemistry after his first semester as he disapproved of
"dissecting an alley cat". After Seth Low Junior College closed in 1938, Asimov
finished his BS degree at University Extension (later the Columbia University
School of General Studies) in 1939. When he failed to secure admission to
medical school, he applied to the graduate program in chemistry at Columbia;
initially rejected and then only accepted on a probationary basis, Asimov
completed his MA in chemistry in 1941 and earned a PhD in biochemistry in 1948.
In between, he spent three years during World War II working as a civilian at
the Philadelphia Navy Yard's Naval Air Experimental Station, living in the
Walnut Hill section of West Philadelphia from 1942 to 1945. In September 1945 he
was drafted into the U.S. Army; if he had not had his birth date corrected, he
would have been officially 26 years old and ineligible. He served for almost
nine months before receiving an honorable discharge. In the course of his brief
military career, he rose to the rank of corporal on the basis of his typing
skills, and narrowly avoided participating in the 1946 atomic bomb tests at
Bikini Atoll, when a bureaucratic mixup that caused his allotment to be stopped
led to his being removed from the task force only days before it was due to sail
to Bikini.

After completing his doctorate, Asimov joined the faculty of the Boston
University School of Medicine, with which he remained associated thereafter.
From 1958, this was in a nonteaching capacity, as he turned to writing full-time
(his writing income had already exceeded his academic salary). Being tenured, he
retained the title of associate professor, and in 1979, the university honored
his writing by promoting him to full professor of biochemistry. Asimov's
personal papers from 1965 onward are archived at the university's Mugar Memorial
Library, to which he donated them at the request of curator Howard Gotlieb.

In 1959, after a recommendation from Arthur Obermayer, Asimov's friend and a
scientist on the US missile protection project, Asimov was approached by DARPA
to join Obermayer's team. Asimov declined, on the grounds that his ability to
write freely would be impaired should he receive classified information.
However, he did submit a paper to DARPA titled "On Creativity" containing ideas
on how government-based science projects could encourage team members to think
more creatively.

Asimov married Gertrude Blugerman (1917, Toronto, Canada – 1990, Boston, USA) on
July 26, 1942. After the wedding the couple lived in an apartment in West
Philadelphia, as Asimov was then employed at the Philadelphia Navy Yard (where
two of his co-workers were L. Sprague de Camp and Robert A. Heinlein). They
moved to Boston in May 1949, then to nearby suburbs Somerville in July 1949,
Waltham in May 1951, and finally West Newton in 1956. They had two children,
David (born 1951) and Robyn Joan (born 1955). In 1970, they separated and Asimov
moved back to New York, this time to the Upper West Side of Manhattan, where he
lived for the rest of his life. He immediately began seeing Janet O. Jeppson and
married her two weeks after his divorce from Gertrude in 1973.

Asimov was a claustrophile: he enjoyed small, enclosed spaces. In the third
volume of his autobiography, he recalls a childhood desire to own a magazine
stand in a New York City Subway station, within which he could enclose himself
and listen to the rumble of passing trains while reading.

Asimov was afraid of flying, only doing so twice in his entire life (once in the
course of his work at the Naval Air Experimental Station and once returning home
from the army base in Oahu in 1946). Consequently, he seldom traveled great
distances. This phobia influenced several of his fiction works, such as the
Wendell Urth mystery stories and the Robot novels featuring Elijah Baley. In his
later years, Asimov found enjoyment traveling on cruise ships; on several
cruises he was part of the entertainment program, giving science-themed talks
aboard ships such as the RMS Queen Elizabeth II.

Asimov was an able public speaker and was a frequent fixture at science fiction
conventions, where he was friendly and approachable. He patiently answered tens
of thousands of questions and other mail with postcards and was pleased to give
autographs. He was of medium height, stocky, with mutton chop whiskers and a
distinct New York accent. His physical dexterity was very poor. He never learned
to swim or ride a bicycle; however, he did learn to drive a car after he moved
to Boston. In his humor book Asimov Laughs Again, he describes Boston driving as
"anarchy on wheels."

Asimov's wide interests included his participation in his later years in
organizations devoted to the comic operas of Gilbert and Sullivan and in The
Wolfe Pack, a group of devotees of the Nero Wolfe mysteries written by Rex
Stout. Many of his short stories mention or quote Gilbert and Sullivan. He was a
prominent member of the Baker Street Irregulars, the leading Sherlock Holmes
society, for whom he wrote an essay arguing that Professor Moriarty's work "The
Dynamics of An Asteroid" involved the willful destruction of an ancient
civilized planet. He was also a member of the all-male literary banqueting club
the Trap Door Spiders, which served as the basis of his fictional group of
mystery solvers, the Black Widowers. He later used his essay on Moriarty's work
as the basis for a Black Widowers story, "The Ultimate Crime", which appeared in
More Tales of the Black Widowers.

In 1984, the American Humanist Association (AHA) named him the Humanist of the
Year. He was one of the signers of the Humanist Manifesto. From 1985 until his
death in 1992, he served as president of the AHA, an honorary appointment. His
successor was his friend and fellow writer Kurt Vonnegut, Jr. He was also a
close friend of Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry, and earned a screen credit
as "special science consultant" on Star Trek: The Motion Picture for advice he
gave during production.

Asimov was a founding member of the Committee for the Scientific Investigation
of Claims of the Paranormal (now the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry) and is
listed in its Pantheon of Skeptics.

Asimov described Carl Sagan as one of only two people he ever met whose
intellect surpassed his own. The other, he claimed, was the computer scientist
and artificial intelligence expert Marvin Minsky.

Asimov suffered a heart attack in 1977, and had triple bypass surgery in
December 1983, during which he contracted HIV from a blood transfusion. When his
HIV status was understood, his physicians warned that if he publicized it, the
anti-AIDS prejudice would likely extend to his family members. When he died in
New York City on April 6, 1992, he was survived by his brother Stanley, his
second wife Janet Asimov, and his children from his first marriage. Stanley
reported the cause of death as heart and kidney failure. The family chose not to
disclose that these were complications of AIDS, because within two days, on
April 8, Arthur Ashe announced his own HIV infection (also contracted in 1983
from a blood transfusion during heart bypass surgery), which resulted in much
public controversy; also doctors continued to insist on secrecy. Ten years
later, after most of Asimov's physicians had died, Janet and Robyn Asimov agreed
that the HIV story should be made public; Janet revealed it in her edition of
his autobiography It's Been a Good Life.

Asimov's career can be divided into several periods. His early career, dominated
by science fiction, began with short stories in 1939 and novels in 1950. This
lasted until about 1958, all but ending after publication of The Naked Sun. He
began publishing nonfiction in 1952, co-authoring a college-level textbook
called Biochemistry and Human Metabolism. Following the brief orbit of the first
man-made satellite Sputnik I by the USSR in 1957, his production of nonfiction,
particularly popular science books, greatly increased, with a consequent drop in
his science fiction output. Over the next quarter century, he wrote only four
science fiction novels. Starting in 1982, the second half of his science fiction
career began with the publication of Foundation's Edge. From then until his
death, Asimov published several more sequels and prequels to his existing
novels, tying them together in a way he had not originally anticipated, making a
unified series. There are, however, many inconsistencies in this unification,
especially in his earlier stories.

Asimov believed his most enduring contributions would be his "Three Laws of
Robotics" and the Foundation series (see Yours, Isaac Asimov, p. 329).
Furthermore, the Oxford English Dictionary credits his science fiction for
introducing the words 'positronic' (an entirely fictional technology),
'psychohistory' (which is also used for a different study on historical
motivations) and 'robotics' into the English language. Asimov coined the term
'robotics' without suspecting that it might be an original word; at the time, he
believed it was simply the natural analogue of words such as mechanics and
hydraulics, but for robots. Unlike his word 'psychohistory', the word 'robotics'
continues in mainstream technical use with Asimov's original definition. Star
Trek: The Next Generation featured androids with "positronic brains" and the
first-season episode, Datalore, calls the positronic brain, "Asimov's dream".

Asimov first began reading the science fiction pulp magazines sold in his
family's confectionery store in 1929. In the mid-1930s he came into contact with
science fiction fandom, particularly the circle that became the Futurians. He
began writing his first science fiction story, "Cosmic Corkscrew", in 1937;
finished it on June 19, 1938, inspired by a visit to the offices of Astounding
Science Fiction; and personally submitted it to Astounding editor John W.
Campbell two days later. Campbell rejected "Cosmic Corkscrew", but encouraged
Asimov to keep trying, and Asimov did. In October, he sold the third story he
finished, "Marooned Off Vesta", to Amazing Stories, then a monthly sci-fi
magazine edited by Raymond A. Palmer, and it appeared in the March 1939 issue.
Two more of his stories appeared that year, "The Weapon Too Dreadful to Use" in
the May Amazing and "Trends" in the July Astounding. For 1940, ISFDB catalogs
seven stories in four different pulp magazines, including one in Astounding.

In September 1941, Astounding published the 32nd story Asimov wrote,
"Nightfall", which has been described as one of "the most famous science-fiction
stories of all time". In 1968 the Science Fiction Writers of America voted
"Nightfall" the best science fiction short story ever written. In his short
story collection Nightfall and Other Stories, he wrote, "The writing of
'Nightfall' was a watershed in my professional career..... I was suddenly taken
seriously and the world of science fiction became aware that I existed. As the
years passed, in fact, it became evident that I had written a 'classic'."

"Nightfall" is an archetypal example of social science fiction, a term coined by
Asimov to describe a new trend in the 1940s, led by authors including Asimov and
Heinlein, away from gadgets and space opera and toward speculation about the
human condition.

By 1941, Asimov had begun selling regularly to Astounding, which was then the
field's leading magazine. From 1943 to 1949, all of his published science
fiction appeared in Astounding.

In 1942, he published the first of his Foundation stories—later collected in the
Foundation trilogy: Foundation (1951), Foundation and Empire (1952), and Second
Foundation (1953)—which recount the collapse and rebirth of a vast interstellar
empire in a universe of the future. Taken together, they are his most famous
work of science fiction, along with the Robot series. In 1966 they won the Hugo
Award for the all-time best series of science fiction novels. Many years later,
due to pressure by fans on Asimov to write another, he continued the series with
Foundation's Edge (1982) and Foundation and Earth (1986), and then went back to
before the original trilogy with Prelude to Foundation (1988) and Forward the
Foundation (1992). The series features his fictional science of psychohistory,
in which the future course of the history of large populations can be predicted.

His positronic robot stories—many of which were collected in I, Robot
(1950)—were begun at about the same time. They promulgated a set of rules of
ethics for robots (see Three Laws of Robotics) and intelligent machines that
greatly influenced other writers and thinkers in their treatment of the subject.
Asimov notes in his introduction to the short story collection The Complete
Robot (1982) that he was largely inspired by the almost relentless tendency of
robots up to that time to fall consistently into a Frankenstein plot in which
they destroyed their creators.

The robot series has led to film adaptations. With Asimov's collaboration, in
about 1977 Harlan Ellison wrote a screenplay of I, Robot that Asimov hoped would
lead to "the first really adult, complex, worthwhile science fiction film ever
made". The screenplay has never been filmed and was eventually published in book
form in 1994. The 2004 movie I, Robot, starring Will Smith, was based on an
unrelated script by Jeff Vintar titled Hardwired, with Asimov's ideas
incorporated later after the rights to Asimov's title were acquired.
(Ironically, the title was not original to Asimov but had previously been used
for a story by Eando Binder.) Also, one of Asimov's robot short stories, "The
Bicentennial Man", was expanded into a novel The Positronic Man by Asimov and
Robert Silverberg, and this was adapted into the 1999 movie Bicentennial Man,
starring Robin Williams.

Besides movies, his Foundation and Robot stories have inspired other derivative
works of science fiction literature, many by well-known and established authors
such as Roger MacBride Allen, Greg Bear, Gregory Benford, David Brin, and Donald
Kingsbury. At least some of these appear to have been done with the blessing of,
or at the request of, Asimov's widow, Janet Asimov.

In 1948, he also wrote a spoof chemistry article, "The Endochronic Properties of
Resublimated Thiotimoline". At the time, Asimov was preparing his own doctoral
dissertation, and for the oral examination to follow that. Fearing a prejudicial
reaction from his graduate school evaluation board at Columbia University,
Asimov asked his editor that it be released under a pseudonym, yet it appeared
under his own name. During his oral examination shortly thereafter, Asimov grew
concerned at the scrutiny he received. At the end of the examination, one
evaluator turned to him, smiling, and said, "What can you tell us, Mr. Asimov,
about the thermodynamic properties of the compound known as thiotimoline". The
hysterically laughing Asimov was then led out of the room. After a five-minute
or so wait, he was summoned back into the Examination Room and congratulated as
"Dr. Asimov".

In 1949, the book publisher Doubleday's science fiction editor Walter I.
Bradbury accepted Asimov's unpublished novelette "Grow Old Along With Me"
(40,000 words) for publication, but requested that it be extended to a full
novel of 70,000 words. The book appeared under the Doubleday imprint in January
1950 with the title of Pebble in the Sky. The Doubleday company went on to
publish five more original science fiction novels by Asimov in the 1950s, along
with the six juvenile Lucky Starr novels, the latter under the pseudonym of
"Paul French". Doubleday also published collections of Asimov's short stories,
beginning with The Martian Way and Other Stories in 1955. The early 1950s also
saw the Gnome Press company publishing one collection of Asimov's positronic
robot stories as I, Robot and his Foundation stories and novelettes as the three
books of the Foundation trilogy. More positronic robot stories were republished
in book form as The Rest of the Robots.

When new science fiction magazines, notably Galaxy magazine and The Magazine of
Fantasy & Science Fiction, appeared in the 1950s, Asimov began publishing short
stories in them as well. He would later refer to the 1950s as his "golden
decade". A number of these stories are included in his Best of anthology,
including "The Last Question" (1956), on the ability of humankind to cope with
and potentially reverse the process of entropy. It was his personal favorite and
considered by many to be equal to "Nightfall". Asimov wrote of it in 1973:

In December 1974, former Beatle Paul McCartney approached Asimov and asked him
if he could write the screenplay for a science-fiction movie musical. McCartney
had a vague idea for the plot and a small scrap of dialogue; he wished to make a
film about a rock band whose members discover they are being impersonated by a
group of extraterrestrials. The band and their impostors would likely be played
by McCartney's group Wings, then at the height of their career. Intrigued by the
idea, although he was not generally a fan of rock music, Asimov quickly produced
a "treatment" or brief outline of the story. He adhered to McCartney's overall
idea, producing a story he felt to be moving and dramatic. However, he did not
make use of McCartney's brief scrap of dialogue, and probably as a consequence,
McCartney rejected the story. The treatment now exists only in the Boston
University archives.

Beginning in 1977, Asimov lent his name to Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction
Magazine (now Asimov's Science Fiction) and penned an editorial for each issue.
There was also a short-lived Asimov's SF Adventure Magazine and a companion
Asimov's Science Fiction Anthology reprint series, published as magazines (in
the same manner as the stablemates Ellery Queen's Mystery Magazine's and Alfred
Hitchcock's Mystery Magazine's "anthologies").

During the late 1950s and 1960s, Asimov shifted gears somewhat, and
substantially decreased his fiction output (he published only four adult novels
between 1957's The Naked Sun and 1982's Foundation's Edge, two of which were
mysteries). At the same time, he greatly increased his nonfiction production,
writing mostly on science topics; the launch of Sputnik in 1957 engendered
public concern over a "science gap", which Asimov's publishers were eager to
fill with as much material as he could write.

Meanwhile, the monthly Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction invited him to
continue his regular nonfiction column, begun in the now-folded bimonthly
companion magazine Venture Science Fiction Magazine, ostensibly dedicated to
popular science, but with Asimov having complete editorial freedom. The first of
the F&SF columns appeared in November 1958, and they followed uninterrupted
thereafter, with 399 entries, until Asimov's terminal illness. These columns,
periodically collected into books by his principal publisher, Doubleday, helped
make Asimov's reputation as a "Great Explainer" of science, and were referred to
by him as his only pop-science writing in which he never had to assume complete
ignorance of the subjects at hand on the part of his readers. His first
wide-ranging reference work, The Intelligent Man's Guide to Science (1960), was
nominated for a National Book Award. The popularity of his science books and the
income he derived from them also allowed him to give up most of his academic
responsibilities and become essentially a full-time freelance writer.

Asimov wrote several essays on the social contentions of his time, including
"Thinking About Thinking" and "Science: Knock Plastic".

The great variety of information covered in Asimov's writings once prompted Kurt
Vonnegut to ask, "How does it feel to know everything?" Asimov replied that he
only knew how it felt to have the 'reputation' of omniscience—"Uneasy".

The feelings of friendship and respect between Asimov and Arthur C. Clarke were
demonstrated by the so-called "Clarke-Asimov Treaty of Park Avenue", put
together as they shared a cab ride in New York. This stated that Asimov was
required to insist that Clarke was the best science fiction writer in the world
(reserving second-best for himself), while Clarke was required to insist that
Asimov was the best science writer in the world (reserving second-best for
himself). Thus, the dedication in Clarke's book Report on Planet Three (1972)
reads: "In accordance with the terms of the Clarke-Asimov treaty, the
second-best science writer dedicates this book to the second-best
science-fiction writer."

Asimov coined the term "robotics" in his 1941 story "Liar!", though he later
remarked that he believed then that he was merely using an existing word, as he
stated in Gold ("The Robot Chronicles"). While acknowledging the Oxford
Dictionary reference, he incorrectly states that the word was first printed
about one-third of the way down the first column of page 100, Astounding Science
Fiction, March 1942 printing of his short story "Runaround".

Asimov also coined the term "spome" in a paper entitled, "There's No Place Like
Spome" in Atmosphere in Space Cabins and Closed Environments, originally
presented as a paper to the American Chemical Society on September 13, 1965. It
refers to any system closed with respect to matter and open with respect to
energy capable of sustaining human life indefinitely.

Asimov coined the term "psychohistory" in his Foundation stories to name a
fictional branch of science which combines history, sociology, and mathematical
statistics to make general predictions about the future behavior of very large
groups of people, such as the Galactic Empire. It was first introduced in the
five short stories (1942–1944) which would later be collected as the 1951 novel
Foundation. Somewhat later, the term "psychohistory" was applied by others to
research of the effects of psychology on history.

In addition to his interest in science, Asimov was also greatly interested in
history. Starting in the 1960s, he wrote 14 popular history books, including The
Greeks: A Great Adventure (1965), The Roman Republic (1966), The Roman Empire
(1967), The Egyptians (1967) and The Near East: 10,000 Years of History (1968).

He published Asimov's Guide to the Bible in two volumes—covering the Old
Testament in 1967 and the New Testament in 1969—and then combined them into one
1,300-page volume in 1981. Complete with maps and tables, the guide goes through
the books of the Bible in order, explaining the history of each one and the
political influences that affected it, as well as biographical information about
the important characters. His interest in literature manifested itself in
several annotations of literary works, including Asimov's Guide to Shakespeare
(1970), Asimov's Annotated Paradise Lost (1974), and The Annotated Gulliver's
Travels (1980).

Asimov was also a noted mystery author and a frequent contributor to Ellery
Queen's Mystery Magazine. He began by writing science fiction mysteries such as
his Wendell Urth stories, but soon moved on to writing "pure" mysteries. He
published two full-length mystery novels, and wrote 66 stories about the Black
Widowers, a group of men who met monthly for dinner, conversation, and a puzzle.
He got the idea for the Widowers from his own association in a stag group called
the Trap Door Spiders and all of the main characters (with the exception of the
waiter, Henry, who he admitted resembled Wodehouse's Jeeves) were modeled after
his closest friends.

Toward the end of his life, Asimov published a series of collections of
limericks, mostly written by himself, starting with Lecherous Limericks, which
appeared in 1975. Limericks: Too Gross, whose title displays Asimov's love of
puns, contains 144 limericks by Asimov and an equal number by John Ciardi. He
even created a slim volume of Sherlockian limericks. Asimov featured Yiddish
humor in Azazel, The Two Centimeter Demon. The two main characters, both Jewish,
talk over dinner, or lunch, or breakfast, about anecdotes of "George" and his
friend Azazel. Asimov's Treasury of Humor is both a working joke book and a
treatise propounding his views on humor theory. According to Asimov, the most
essential element of humor is an abrupt change in point of view, one that
suddenly shifts focus from the important to the trivial, or from the sublime to
the ridiculous.

Particularly in his later years, Asimov to some extent cultivated an image of
himself as an amiable lecher. In 1971, as a response to the popularity of sexual
guidebooks such as The Sensuous Woman (by "J") and The Sensuous Man (by "M"),
Asimov published The Sensuous Dirty Old Man under the byline "Dr. 'A'" (although
his full name was printed on the paperback edition, first published 1972).

Asimov published three volumes of autobiography. In Memory Yet Green (1979) and
In Joy Still Felt (1980) cover his life up to 1978. The third volume, I. Asimov:
A Memoir (1994), covered his whole life (rather than following on from where the
second volume left off). The epilogue was written by his widow Janet Asimov
after his death. The book won a Hugo Award in 1995. Janet Asimov edited It's
Been a Good Life (2002), a condensed version of his three autobiographies. He
also published three volumes of retrospectives of his writing, Opus 100 (1969),
Opus 200 (1979), and Opus 300 (1984).

In 1987, the Asimovs co-wrote How to Enjoy Writing: A Book of Aid and Comfort.
In it they offer advice on how to maintain a positive attitude and stay
productive when dealing with discouragement, distractions, rejection, and
thick-headed editors. The book includes many quotations, essays, anecdotes, and
husband-wife dialogues about the ups and downs of being an author.

Asimov and Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry developed a unique relationship
during Star Trek's initial launch in the late 1960s. Asimov wrote a critical
essay on Star Trek's scientific accuracy for TV Guide magazine. Roddenberry
retorted respectfully with a personal letter explaining the limitations of
accuracy when writing a weekly series. Asimov corrected himself with a follow-up
essay to TV Guide claiming that despite its inaccuracies, Star Trek was a fresh
and intellectually challenging science fiction television show. The two remained
friends to the point where Asimov even served as an advisor on a number of Star
Trek projects.

In 1973, Asimov published a proposal for calendar reform, called the World
Season Calendar. It divides the year into four seasons (named A–D) of 13 weeks
(91 days) each. This allows days to be named, e.g., "D-73" instead of December 1
(due to December 1 being the 73rd day of the 4th quarter). An extra 'year day'
is added for a total of 365 days.

Asimov won more than a dozen annual awards for particular works of science
fiction and a half dozen lifetime awards. He also received 14 honorary doctorate
degrees from universities.

One of the most common impressions of Asimov's fiction work is that his writing
style is extremely unornamented. In 1980, science fiction scholar James Gunn,
professor emeritus of English at the University of Kansas wrote of I, Robot:

Gunn observes places where Asimov's style rises to the demands of the situation;
he cites the climax of "Liar!" as an example. Sharply drawn characters occur at
key junctures of his storylines: Susan Calvin in "Liar!" and "Evidence", Arkady
Darell in Second Foundation, Elijah Baley in The Caves of Steel, and Hari Seldon
in the Foundation prequels. Asimov addresses this criticism at the beginning of
his book Nemesis:

Other than books by Gunn and Patrouch, a relative dearth of "literary" criticism
exists on Asimov (particularly when compared to the sheer volume of his output).
Cowart and Wymer's Dictionary of Literary Biography (1981) gives a possible
reason:

Gunn's and Patrouch's respective studies of Asimov both take the stand that a
clear, direct prose style is still a style. Gunn's 1982 book goes into
considerable depth commenting upon each of Asimov's novels published to that
date. He does not praise all of Asimov's fiction (nor does Patrouch), but he
does call some passages in The Caves of Steel "reminiscent of Proust". When
discussing how that novel depicts night falling over futuristic New York City,
Gunn says that Asimov's prose "need not be ashamed anywhere in literary
society".

Although he prided himself on his unornamented prose style (for which he
credited Clifford D. Simak as an early influence), Asimov also enjoyed giving
his longer stories complicated narrative structures, often by arranging chapters
in nonchronological ways. Some readers have been put off by this, complaining
that the nonlinearity is not worth the trouble and adversely affects the clarity
of the story. For example, the first third of The Gods Themselves begins with
Chapter 6, then backtracks to fill in earlier material. (John Campbell advised
Asimov to begin his stories as late in the plot as possible. This advice helped
Asimov create "Reason", one of the early Robot stories. See In Memory Yet Green
for details of that time period.) Patrouch found that the interwoven and nested
flashbacks of The Currents of Space did serious harm to that novel, to such an
extent that only a "dyed-in-the-kyrt Asimov fan" could enjoy it. Asimov's
tendency to contort his timelines is perhaps most apparent in his later novel
Nemesis, in which one group of characters lives in the "present" and another
group starts in the "past", beginning 15 years earlier and gradually moving
toward the time period of the first group.[citation needed]

Asimov was sometimes criticized for the general absence of sexuality (and of
extraterrestrial life) in his science fiction. He claimed he wrote The Gods
Themselves to respond to these criticisms, which often came from New Wave
science fiction (and often British) writers. The second part (of three) of the
novel is set on an alien world with three sexes, and the sexual behavior of
these creatures is extensively depicted.

Asimov once explained that his reluctance to write about aliens came from an
incident early in his career when Astounding's editor John Campbell rejected one
of his science fiction stories because the alien characters were portrayed as
superior to the humans. The nature of the rejection led him to believe that
Campbell may have based his bias towards humans in stories on a real-world
racial bias. Unwilling to write only weak alien races, and concerned that a
confrontation would jeopardize his and Campbell's friendship, he decided he
would not write about aliens at all. Nevertheless, in response to these
criticisms, he wrote The Gods Themselves, which contains aliens and alien sex.
The book won the Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1972, and the Hugo Award for
Best Novel in 1973. Asimov said that of all his writings, he was most proud of
the middle section of The Gods Themselves, the part that deals with those
themes.

In the Hugo Award-winning novella "Gold", Asimov describes an author clearly
based on himself who has one of his books (The Gods Themselves) adapted into a
"compu-drama", essentially photo-realistic computer animation. The director
criticizes the fictionalized Asimov ("Gregory Laborian") for having an extremely
nonvisual style, making it difficult to adapt his work, and the author explains
that he relies on ideas and dialogue rather than description to get his points
across.

Asimov was criticized for a lack of strong female characters in his early work.
In his autobiographical writings, such as Gold ("Women and Science Fiction"), he
acknowledges this and responds by pointing to inexperience. His later novels,
written with more female characters but in essentially the same prose style as
his early science-fiction stories, brought this matter to a wider audience. For
example, the August 25, 1985 Washington Post's "Book World" section reports of
Robots and Empire as follows:

Isaac Asimov was an atheist, a humanist, and a rationalist. He did not oppose
religious conviction in others, but he frequently railed against superstitious
and pseudoscientific beliefs that tried to pass themselves off as genuine
science. During his childhood, his father and mother observed Orthodox Jewish
traditions, though not as stringently as they had in Petrovichi; they did not,
however, force their beliefs upon young Isaac. Thus, he grew up without strong
religious influences, coming to believe that the Torah represented Hebrew
mythology in the same way that the Iliad recorded Greek mythology. As his books
Treasury of Humor and Asimov Laughs Again record, Asimov was willing to tell
jokes involving God, Satan, the Garden of Eden, Jerusalem, and other religious
topics, expressing the viewpoint that a good joke can do more to provoke thought
than hours of philosophical discussion.

For a brief while, his father worked in the local synagogue to enjoy the
familiar surroundings and, as Isaac put it, "shine as a learned scholar" versed
in the sacred writings. This scholarship was a seed for his later authorship and
publication of Asimov's Guide to the Bible, an analysis of the historic
foundations for both the Old and New Testaments. For many years, Asimov called
himself an atheist; however, he considered the term somewhat inadequate, as it
described what he did not believe rather than what he did. Eventually, he
described himself as a "humanist" and considered that term more practical. He
did, however, continue to identify himself as a nonobservant Jew, as stated in
his introduction to Jack Dann's anthology of Jewish science fiction, Wandering
Stars: "I attend no services and follow no ritual and have never undergone that
curious puberty rite, the bar mitzvah. It doesn't matter. I am Jewish."

When asked in an interview in 1982 if he was an atheist, Asimov replied, "I am
an atheist, out and out. It took me a long time to say it. I've been an atheist
for years and years, but somehow I felt it was intellectually unrespectable to
say one was an atheist, because it assumed knowledge that one didn't have.
Somehow it was better to say one was a humanist or an agnostic. I finally
decided that I'm a creature of emotion as well as of reason. Emotionally I am an
atheist. I don't have the evidence to prove that God doesn't exist, but I so
strongly suspect he doesn't that I don't want to waste my time." Likewise he
said about religious education: "I would not be satisfied to have my kids choose
to be religious without trying to argue them out of it, just as I would not be
satisfied to have them decide to smoke regularly or engage in any other practice
I consider detrimental to mind or body."

In his last volume of autobiography, Asimov wrote, "If I were not an atheist, I
would believe in a God who would choose to save people on the basis of the
totality of their lives and not the pattern of their words. I think he would
prefer an honest and righteous atheist to a TV preacher whose every word is God,
God, God, and whose every deed is foul, foul, foul." The same memoir states his
belief that Hell is "the drooling dream of a sadist" crudely affixed to an
all-merciful God; if even human governments were willing to curtail cruel and
unusual punishments, wondered Asimov, why would punishment in the afterlife not
be restricted to a limited term? Asimov rejected the idea that a human belief or
action could merit infinite punishment. If an afterlife existed, he claimed, the
longest and most severe punishment would be reserved for those who "slandered
God by inventing Hell".

Asimov said about using religious motives in his writing: "I tend to ignore
religion in my own stories altogether, except when I absolutely have to have it.
...and, whenever I bring in a religious motif, that religion is bound to be seem
vaguely Christian because that is the only religion I know anything about, even
though it is not mine. An unsympathetic reader might think that I am
"burlesquing" Christianity, but I am not. Then too, it is impossible to write
science fiction and really ignore religion."

Asimov became a staunch supporter of the Democratic Party during the New Deal,
and thereafter remained a political liberal. He was a vocal opponent of the
Vietnam War in the 1960s and in a television interview during the early 1970s he
publicly endorsed George McGovern. He was unhappy about what he considered an
"irrationalist" viewpoint taken by many radical political activists from the
late 1960s and onwards. In his second volume of autobiography, In Joy Still
Felt, Asimov recalled meeting the counterculture figure Abbie Hoffman. Asimov's
impression was that the 1960s' counterculture heroes had ridden an emotional
wave which, in the end, left them stranded in a "no-man's land of the spirit"
from which he wondered if they would ever return.

Asimov vehemently opposed Richard Nixon, considering him "a crook and a liar".
He closely followed Watergate, and was pleased when the president was forced to
resign. Asimov was dismayed over the pardon extended to Nixon by his successor:
"I was not impressed by the argument that it has spared the nation an ordeal. To
my way of thinking, the ordeal was necessary to make certain it would never
happen again."

After Asimov's name appeared in the mid-1960s on a list of people the Communist
Party USA "considered amenable" to its goals, the FBI investigated him. Because
of his academic background, the bureau briefly considered Asimov as a possible
candidate for known Soviet spy ROBPROF, but found nothing suspicious in his life
or background.

Though from a Jewish family, Asimov appeared to hold an equivocal attitude
towards Israel. In his first autobiography, he indicates his support for the
safety of Israel, though insisting that he was not a Zionist. In his third
autobiography, Asimov stated his opposition to the creation of a Jewish state,
on the grounds that he was opposed to the concept of nation-states in general,
and supported the notion of a single humanity. Asimov especially worried about
the safety of Israel given that it has been created among hostile neighbours,
and that Jews have merely created for themselves another "Jewish ghetto".

Asimov considered himself a feminist even before Women's Liberation became a
widespread movement; he argued that the issue of women's rights was closely
connected to that of population control. Furthermore, he believed that
homosexuality must be considered a "moral right" on population grounds, as must
all consenting adult sexual activity that does not lead to reproduction. He
issued many appeals for population control, reflecting a perspective articulated
by people from Thomas Malthus through Paul R. Ehrlich.

In a 1988 interview by Bill Moyers, Asimov proposed computer-aided learning,
where people would use computers to find information on subjects in which they
were interested. He thought this would make learning more interesting, since
people would have the freedom to choose what to learn, and would help spread
knowledge around the world. Also, the one-to-one model would let students learn
at their own pace.

Asimov's defense of civil applications of nuclear power even after the Three
Mile Island nuclear power plant incident damaged his relations with some of his
fellow liberals. In a letter reprinted in Yours, Isaac Asimov, he states that
although he would prefer living in "no danger whatsoever" than near a nuclear
reactor, he would still prefer a home near a nuclear power plant than in a slum
on Love Canal or near "a Union Carbide plant producing methyl isocyanate", the
latter being a reference to the Bhopal disaster.

In the closing years of his life, Asimov blamed the deterioration of the quality
of life that he perceived in New York City on the shrinking tax base caused by
the middle-class flight to the suburbs, though he continued to support high
taxes on the middle class to pay for social programs. His last nonfiction book,
Our Angry Earth (1991, co-written with his long-time friend, science fiction
author Frederik Pohl), deals with elements of the environmental crisis such as
overpopulation, oil dependence, war, global warming, and the destruction of the
ozone layer. In response to being presented by Bill Moyers with the question
"What do you see happening to the idea of dignity to human species if this
population growth continues at its present rate?", Asimov responded:

Asimov stated, both in his autobiography and in several essays, that he enjoyed
the writings of J. R. R. Tolkien. He paid tribute to The Lord of the Rings in a
"Black Widowers" story. (In his letter to Charlotte and Denis Plimmer, who had
previously interviewed him for Daily Telegraph Magazine, Tolkien said that he
enjoyed the science fiction of Isaac Asimov.)

He admired a number of his contemporaries, in particular fellow science-fiction
author and science writer Arthur C. Clarke, with whom he entered into the
lighthearted "Treaty of Park Avenue", which stipulated that Clarke was free to
refer to himself as the best science fiction writer in the world (Asimov being
second-best), provided he admitted that Asimov was the best science writer in
the world (Clarke being second-best). He freely acknowledged a number of his
fellow writers as superior to himself in talent, saying of Harlan Ellison, "He
is (in my opinion) one of the best writers in the world, far more skilled at the
art than I am."

Paul Krugman, holder of a Nobel Prize in Economics, has stated Asimov's concept
of psychohistory inspired him to become an economist.

Along with such figures as Bertrand Russell and Karl Popper, Asimov left his
mark as one of the most distinguished interdisciplinarians of the 20th century.
"Few individuals," writes James L Christian, "understood better than Isaac
Asimov what synoptic thinking is all about. His almost 500 books--which he wrote
as a specialist, a knowledgeable authority, or just an excited layman--range
over almost all conceivable subjects: the sciences, history, literature,
religion, and of course, science fiction." Asimov explained his quest for
holistic knowledge:

Depending on the counting convention used, and including all titles, charts, and
edited collections, there may be currently over 500 items in Asimov's
bibliography—not counting his individual short stories, individual essays, and
criticism. For his 100th, 200th, and 300th books (based on his personal count),
Asimov published Opus 100 (1969), Opus 200 (1979), and Opus 300 (1984),
celebrating his writing.

Asimov's books span all major categories of the Dewey Decimal Classification
except for category 100, philosophy and psychology. Although Asimov did write
several essays about psychology, and forewords for the books The Humanist Way
(1988) and In Pursuit of Truth (1982), which were classified in the 100s
category, none of his own books was classified in that category.

According to UNESCO's Index Translationum database, Asimov is the world's 24th
most-translated author.

An online exhibit in West Virginia University Libraries' virtually complete
Asimov Collection displays features, visuals, and descriptions of some of his
over 600 books, games, audio recordings, videos, and wall charts. Many first,
rare, and autographed editions are in the Libraries' Rare Book Room. Book
jackets and autographs are presented online along with descriptions and images
of children's books, science fiction art, multimedia, and other materials in the
collection.

For a listing of Asimov's books in chronological order within his future
history, see the Foundation series list of books.

The Robot series was originally separate from the Foundation series. The
Galactic Empire novels were published as independent stories, set earlier in the
same future as Foundation. Later in life, Asimov synthesized the Robot series
into a single coherent "history" that appeared in the extension of the
Foundation series.

Novels marked with an asterisk * have minor connections to the Foundation and
Robot series.

Collections of Asimov's essays – originally published as monthly columns in the
Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orange_Is_the_New_Black

Orange Is the New Black (sometimes abbreviated to OITNB) is an American
comedy-drama web television series. The series, created by Jenji Kohan and
produced by Tilted Productions in association with Lionsgate Television, is
based on Piper Kerman's memoir, Orange Is the New Black: My Year in a Women's
Prison (2010), about her experiences at FCI Danbury, a minimum-security federal
prison. Orange Is the New Black is streamed on Netflix, and premiered on July
11, 2013. In February 2016, the series was renewed for a fifth, sixth, and
seventh season. The fifth season will be released on June 9, 2017.

Orange Is the New Black has become Netflix's most-watched original series. It
has received critical acclaim and many accolades. For its first season, the
series garnered 12 Primetime Emmy Award nominations, including Outstanding
Comedy Series, Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series, and Outstanding
Directing for a Comedy Series, winning three. A new Emmy rule in 2015 forced the
series to change categories from comedy to drama. For its second season, the
series received four Emmy nominations, including Outstanding Drama Series, and
Uzo Aduba won for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series. Orange Is
the New Black is the first series to score Emmy nominations in both comedy and
drama categories. The series has also received six Golden Globe Award
nominations, six Writers Guild of America Award nominations, two Producers Guild
of America Awards, an American Film Institute award, and a Peabody Award.

The series revolves around Piper Chapman (Taylor Schilling), a woman in her 30s
living in New York City who is sentenced to 15 months in Litchfield
Penitentiary, a minimum-security women's federal prison (initially operated by
the "Federal Department of Corrections", a fictional version of the Federal
Bureau of Prisons, and later acquired by MCC, a private prison company) in
upstate New York. Piper had been convicted of transporting a suitcase full of
drug money for her girlfriend Alex Vause (Laura Prepon), an international drug
smuggler. The offense had occurred 10 years prior to the start of the series and
in that time Piper had moved on to a quiet, law-abiding life among New York's
upper middle class. Her sudden and unexpected indictment severely disrupts her
relationships with her fiancé, family and friends.

In prison, Piper is reunited with Alex (who named Piper in her trial, resulting
in Piper's arrest) and they re-examine their relationship. Simultaneously, Piper
must learn how to survive in prison, and how to overcome its numerous, inherent
struggles. Episodes often feature flashbacks of significant events from various
inmates' and prison guards' pasts. These flashbacks typically explain how the
inmate came to be in prison, or otherwise further develop the character's
backstory.

The show also pays close attention to how instances of corruption, drug
smuggling, funding cuts, overcrowding and guard brutality adversely impact not
only the prisoners' health and well-being, but also the prison's basic ability
to fulfil its fundamental responsibilities and ethical obligations as a federal
corrections institution. One of the show's key conflicts involves the prison's
Director of Human Activities, Joe Caputo, whose efforts and aims as a warden
constantly conflict with the business interests of MCC, which acquired the
facility when it was about to be shut down.

Show creator Jenji Kohan came across Piper Kerman's memoir after a friend sent
it to her. She then set up a meeting with Kerman to pitch her on a TV
adaptation, which she notes she "screwed up" as she spent most of the time
asking Kerman about her experiences she described in the book rather than
selling her on the show. This appealed to Kerman as it let her know that she was
a fan and she signed off on the adaptation. Kohan would later go on to describe
the main character, Piper Chapman as a "trojan horse" for the series allowing it
to focus on characters whose demographics would not normally be represented on
TV.

In July 2011, it was revealed that Netflix was in negotiations with Lionsgate
for a 13-episode TV adaptation of Kerman's memoirs with Kohan as creator. In
November 2011, negotiations were finalized and the series had been greenlit.
Casting announcements began in August 2012 with Taylor Schilling, the first to
be cast, in the lead role as Piper Chapman, followed by Jason Biggs as Piper's
fiancé Larry Bloom.

Laura Prepon and Yael Stone were next to join the series, Prepon initially
auditioned for the starring role of Piper; however Kohan felt that she was not
sympathetic enough in the role noting a "toughness and a presence to her that
wasn’t right for the character." Kohan instead gave her the role of Alex. Around
the same time Laverne Cox, a black transgender woman was cast, as Sophia Burset,
a transgender character. The Advocate touted Orange Is the New Black as possibly
the first women-in-prison narrative to cast a transgender woman for this type of
role. This American Life host Ira Glass was offered a role as a public radio
host, but he declined. The role instead went to Robert Stanton, who plays the
fictional host Maury Kind.

The series is set in a fictional prison in Litchfield, New York, which is a real
town in upstate New York, but it does not have a federal penitentiary. The
series began filming in the old Rockland Children's Psychiatric Center in
Rockland County, New York, on March 7, 2013. The title sequence features photos
of real former female prisoners including Kerman herself.

On June 27, 2013, prior to the series premiere, Netflix renewed the show for a
second season consisting of 13 episodes. For the second season, Uzo Aduba, Taryn
Manning, Danielle Brooks, and Natasha Lyonne were promoted to series regulars.
Laura Prepon did not return as a series regular for a second season because of
scheduling conflicts, but returned for season 3 as a regular. On May 5, 2014,
the series was renewed for a third season, as revealed by actress Laura Prepon.
For the third season, several actors were promoted to series regulars, including
Selenis Leyva, Adrienne C. Moore, Dascha Polanco, Nick Sandow, Yael Stone, and
Samira Wiley. Both Jason Biggs and Pablo Schreiber were confirmed as not
returning for the third season, but Schreiber appeared in the 10th episode of
the third season. The series was renewed for a fourth season on April 15, 2015,
prior to its third-season premiere. For the fourth season, Jackie Cruz and Lea
DeLaria were promoted to series regulars; with Elizabeth Rodriguez also being
promoted by the season's sixth episode. On February 5, 2016, the series was
renewed for a fifth, sixth and seventh season.

Orange Is the New Black has received critical acclaim, particularly praised for
humanizing prisoners and for its depiction of race, sexuality, gender and body
types.

The first season received positive reviews from critics, review aggregator
Metacritic gave it a weighted average score of 79 out of 100 based on reviews
from 32 critics, indicating favorable reviews. On Rotten Tomatoes, season one
has a 93% approval rating based on 40 reviews, with an average rating of 8.2 out
of 10 . The site's critical consensus is "Orange Is the New Black is a sharp mix
of black humor and dramatic heft, with interesting characters and an intriguing
flashback structure."

Hank Stuever, television critic for The Washington Post, gave Orange Is the New
Black a perfect score. In his review of the series, he stated: "In Jenji Kohan's
magnificent and thoroughly engrossing new series, Orange Is the New Black,
prison is still the pits. But it is also filled with the entire range of human
emotion and stories, all of which are brought vividly to life in a world where a
stick of gum could ignite either a romance or a death threat." Maureen Ryan, of
The Huffington Post, wrote: "Orange is one of the best new programs of the year,
and the six episodes I've seen have left me hungry to see more."

The second season also received critical acclaim. Rotten Tomatoes gave a rating
of 98%, with an average rating of 9.1 out of 10 based on 42 reviews. The site's
critical consensus reads: "With a talented ensemble cast bringing life to a
fresh round of serial drama, Orange Is the New Black's sophomore season lives up
to its predecessor's standard for female-led television excellence. Metacritic
gave the second season a score of 89 out of 100 based on 31 critics, indicating
"universal acclaim". David Wiegland of the San Francisco Chronicle gave the
season a positive review, calling the first six episodes "not only as great as
the first season, but arguably better."

The third season received critical acclaim. On Metacritic, it has a score of 83
out of 100 based on 24 reviews. On Rotten Tomatoes, it has a 96% rating with an
average score of 8.2 out of 10 based on 53 reviews. The site's critical
consensus reads: "Thanks to its blend of potent comedy and rich character work,
Orange is the New Black remains a bittersweet pleasure in its third season."

The fourth season received critical acclaim. On Metacritic, it has a score of 86
out of 100 based on 19 reviews. On Rotten Tomatoes, it has a 97% rating with an
average score of 8.6 out of 10 based on 38 reviews. The site's critical
consensus reads: "Orange is the New Black is back and better than ever, with a
powerful fourth season full of compelling performances by the ensemble cast".
James Poniewozik of The New York Times reviewed the fourth season as "By the
first yardstick, Season 4 is ambitious but uneven; by the latter, it's the
series' best."

The series began airing on broadcast television in New Zealand on TV2 on August
19, 2013. It premiered in Australia on October 9, 2013, on Showcase. The second
season began on Showcase on July 16, 2014, and the third season premiered on
June 11, 2015.

Orange Is the New Black generated more viewers and hours viewed in its first
week than the other Netflix original series House of Cards and Arrested
Development. In October 2013, Netflix stated that the show is a "tremendous
success" for the streaming platform. "It will end the year as our most watched
original series ever and, as with each of our other previously launched
originals, enjoys an audience comparable with successful shows on cable and
broadcast TV." As reported in February 2016, Orange Is the New Black remains
Netflix's most-watched original series. In 2016, a New York Times study of the
50 TV shows with the most Facebook Likes found that despite its "minority-rich
ensemble cast", Orange is the New Black "appeals more to a white audience".

Orange Is the New Black has received many accolades since its debut. The series
has garnered 16 Emmy Award nominations and four wins. For its first season, it
received 12 Emmy Award nominations, including Outstanding Comedy Series,
Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series, and Outstanding Directing for a Comedy
Series, winning three. Taylor Schilling received a Golden Globe Award nomination
for Best Actress in a Television Series – Drama. In 2013, the American Film
Institute selected the series as one of the Top 10 Television Programs of the
Year.

A new Emmy rule in 2015, classifying half-hour shows as comedies and hour-long
shows as dramas, forced the series to change categories from comedy to drama for
its second season. That year, the series received four Emmy nominations,
including Outstanding Drama Series, and Aduba won her second Emmy Award, for
Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series. Orange Is the New Black became
the first series to receive Emmy nominations in both comedy and drama
categories. For its second season, the series also received three Golden Globe
Award nominations: Best Television Series – Musical or Comedy, Best Actress –
Television Series Musical or Comedy for Schilling, and Best Supporting Actress –
Series, Miniseries or Television Film for Aduba. At the 21st Screen Actors Guild
Awards, the series won Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series
and Aduba won Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Comedy Series.

For its third season, Orange Is the New Black won Screen Actors Guild Awards for
Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series and Outstanding
Performance by a Female Actor in a Comedy Series (Aduba). It received a Golden
Globe Award nomination for Best Television Series – Musical or Comedy. The
series has also received, among other accolades, six Writers Guild of America
Award nominations, five Satellite Awards, four Critics' Choice Television
Awards, a GLAAD Media Award, an American Cinema Editors Award, a Producers Guild
of America Award, and a Peabody Award.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barack_obama

Barack Hussein Obama II (US i/bəˈrɑːk huːˈseɪn oʊˈbɑːmə/ bə-RAHK hoo-SAYN
oh-BAH-mə; born August 4, 1961) is an American politician who served as the 44th
President of the United States from 2009 to 2017. He is the first African
American to have served as president, as well as the first born outside the
contiguous United States. He previously served in the U.S. Senate representing
Illinois from 2005 to 2008, and in the Illinois State Senate from 1997 to 2004.

Obama was born in Honolulu, Hawaii, two years after the territory was admitted
to the Union as the 50th state. He grew up mostly in Hawaii, but also spent one
year of his childhood in Washington State and four years in Indonesia. After
graduating from Columbia University in 1983, he worked as a community organizer
in Chicago. In 1988 Obama enrolled in Harvard Law School, where he was the first
black president of the Harvard Law Review. After graduation, he became a civil
rights attorney and professor, teaching constitutional law at the University of
Chicago Law School from 1992 to 2004. Obama represented the 13th District for
three terms in the Illinois Senate from 1997 to 2004, when he ran for the U.S.
Senate. Obama received national attention in 2004, with his unexpected March
primary win, his well-received July Democratic National Convention keynote
address, and his landslide November election to the Senate. In 2008, Obama was
nominated for president, a year after his campaign began, and after a close
primary campaign against Hillary Clinton. He was elected over Republican John
McCain, and was inaugurated on January 20, 2009. Nine months later, Obama was
named the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize laureate.

During his first two years in office, Obama signed more landmark legislation
than any Democratic president since LBJ's Great Society. Main reforms were the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (often referred to as "Obamacare"),
the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, and the Don't
Ask, Don't Tell Repeal Act of 2010. The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 and Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation
Act of 2010 served as economic stimulus amidst the Great Recession, but the GOP
regained control of the House of Representatives in 2011. After a lengthy debate
over the national debt limit, Obama signed the Budget Control and the American
Taxpayer Relief Acts. In foreign policy, Obama increased U.S. troop levels in
Afghanistan, reduced nuclear weapons with the U.S.-Russian New START treaty, and
ended military involvement in the Iraq War. He ordered military involvement in
Libya in opposition to Muammar Gaddafi, and the military operation that resulted
in the death of Osama bin Laden.

After winning re-election over Mitt Romney, Obama was sworn in for a second term
in 2013. During his second term, Obama promoted greater inclusiveness for LGBT
Americans, with his administration filing briefs that urged the Supreme Court to
strike down same-sex marriage bans as unconstitutional (United States v. Windsor
and Obergefell v. Hodges). Obama also advocated gun control in response to the
Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, and issued wide-ranging executive actions
concerning climate change and immigration. In foreign policy, Obama ordered
military intervention in Iraq in response to gains made by ISIL after the 2011
withdrawal from Iraq, continued the process of ending U.S. combat operations in
Afghanistan, promoted discussions that led to the 2015 Paris Agreement on global
climate change, initiated the sanctions against Russia following the invasion in
Ukraine, brokered a nuclear deal with Iran, and normalized U.S. relations with
Cuba.

Obama left office in January 2017 with a 60% approval rating. He currently
resides in Washington, D.C. His presidential library will be built in Chicago.

Obama was born on August 4, 1961, at Kapiʻolani Maternity & Gynecological
Hospital in Honolulu, Hawaii. He is the only President to have been born in
Hawaii. He was born to a white mother and a black father. His mother, Ann Dunham
(1942–1995), was born in Wichita, Kansas, of mostly English descent, with some
German, Irish, Scottish, Swiss, and Welsh ancestry. His father, Barack Obama Sr.
(1936–1982), was a married Luo Kenyan man from Nyang'oma Kogelo. Obama's parents
met in 1960 in a Russian language class at the University of Hawaii at Manoa,
where his father was a foreign student on scholarship. The couple married in
Wailuku, Hawaii on February 2, 1961, six months before Obama was born.

In late August 1961, Obama's mother moved with him to the University of
Washington in Seattle for a year. During that time, Obama Sr. completed his
undergraduate degree in economics in Hawaii in June 1962, then left to attend
graduate school on a scholarship at Harvard University, where he earned an M.A.
in economics. Obama's parents divorced in March 1964. Obama Sr. returned to
Kenya in 1964, where he married for a third time. He visited his son in Hawaii
only once, in 1971, before he was killed in an automobile accident in 1982, when
Obama was 21 years old. Of his early childhood, Obama recalled, "That my father
looked nothing like the people around me – that he was black as pitch, my mother
white as milk – barely registered in my mind." He described his struggles as a
young adult to reconcile social perceptions of his multiracial heritage.

In 1963, Dunham met Lolo Soetoro, an Indonesian East–West Center graduate
student in geography at the University of Hawaii, and the couple were married on
Molokai on March 15, 1965. After two one-year extensions of his J-1 visa, Lolo
returned to Indonesia in 1966, followed sixteen months later by his wife and
stepson in 1967, with the family initially living in a Menteng Dalam
neighborhood in the Tebet subdistrict of south Jakarta, then from 1970 in a
wealthier neighborhood in the Menteng subdistrict of central Jakarta.

From ages six to ten, Obama attended local Indonesian-language schools: Santo
Fransiskus Asisi (St. Francis of Assisi) Catholic School for two years and
Besuki Public School for one and a half years, supplemented by English-language
Calvert School homeschooling by his mother. During his time in Indonesia,
Obama's step-father taught him to be resilient and gave him "a pretty hardheaded
assessment of how the world works".

Obama returned to Honolulu in 1971 to live with his maternal grandparents,
Madelyn and Stanley Dunham. He attended Punahou School— a private college
preparatory school— with the aid of a scholarship from fifth grade until his
graduation from high school in 1979. In his youth, Obama went by the nickname
"Barry". Obama lived with his mother and sister in Hawaii for three years from
1972 to 1975 while his mother was a graduate student in anthropology at the
University of Hawaii. Obama chose to stay in Hawaii with his grandparents for
high school at Punahou when his mother and sister returned to Indonesia in 1975
so his mother could begin anthropology field work. His mother spent most of the
next two decades in Indonesia, divorcing Lolo in 1980 and earning a PhD degree
in 1992, before dying in 1995 in Hawaii following unsuccessful treatment for
ovarian cancer and uterine cancer.

Reflecting later on his years in Honolulu, Obama wrote: "The opportunity that
Hawaii offered – to experience a variety of cultures in a climate of mutual
respect – became an integral part of my world view, and a basis for the values
that I hold most dear." Obama has also written and talked about using alcohol,
marijuana, and cocaine during his teenage years to "push questions of who I was
out of my mind". Obama was also a member of the "choom gang", a self-named group
of friends that spent time together and occasionally smoked marijuana.

After graduating from high school in 1979, Obama moved to Los Angeles to attend
Occidental College. In February 1981, Obama made his first public speech,
calling for Occidental to participate in the disinvestment from South Africa in
response to that nation's policy of apartheid. In mid-1981, Obama traveled to
Indonesia to visit his mother and half-sister Maya, and visited the families of
college friends in Pakistan and India for three weeks. Later in 1981, he
transferred as a junior to Columbia University in New York City, where he
majored in political science with a specialty in international relations and in
English literature and lived off-campus on West 109th Street. He graduated with
a BA degree in 1983 and worked for a year at the Business International
Corporation, then at the New York Public Interest Research Group. In 1985, Obama
was among the leaders of May Day efforts to bring attention to the New York City
Subway system, which was in a bad condition at the time. Obama traveled to
several subway stations to get people to sign letters addressed to local
officials and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, and was photographed at
the City College subway station holding a sign protesting against the system's
condition.

In a 2006 interview, Obama highlighted the diversity of his extended family:
"It's like a little mini-United Nations", he said. "I've got relatives who look
like Bernie Mac, and I've got relatives who look like Margaret Thatcher." Obama
has a half-sister with whom he was raised (Maya Soetoro-Ng, the daughter of his
mother and her Indonesian second husband) and seven half-siblings from his
Kenyan father's family—six of them living. Obama's mother was survived by her
Kansas-born mother, Madelyn Dunham, until her death on November 2, 2008, two
days before his election to the Presidency. Obama also has roots in Ireland; he
met with his Irish cousins in Moneygall in May 2011. In Dreams from My Father,
Obama ties his mother's family history to possible Native American ancestors and
distant relatives of Jefferson Davis, President of the Confederate States of
America during the American Civil War.

Besides his native English, Obama speaks some basic Indonesian, having learned
the language during his four childhood years in Jakarta. He plays basketball, a
sport he participated in as a member of his high school's varsity team; he is
left-handed.

Obama is a supporter of the Chicago White Sox, and he threw out the first pitch
at the 2005 ALCS when he was still a senator. In 2009, he threw out the
ceremonial first pitch at the All-Star Game while wearing a White Sox jacket. He
is also primarily a Chicago Bears football fan in the NFL, but in his childhood
and adolescence was a fan of the Pittsburgh Steelers, and rooted for them ahead
of their victory in Super Bowl XLIII 12 days after he took office as President.
In 2011, Obama invited the 1985 Chicago Bears to the White House; the team had
not visited the White House after their Super Bowl win in 1986 due to the Space
Shuttle Challenger disaster.

In June 1989, Obama met Michelle Robinson when he was employed as a summer
associate at the Chicago law firm of Sidley Austin. Assigned for three months as
Obama's adviser at the firm, Robinson joined him at several group social
functions, but declined his initial requests to date. They began dating later
that summer, became engaged in 1991, and were married on October 3, 1992. The
couple's first daughter, Malia Ann, was born on July 4, 1998, followed by a
second daughter, Natasha ("Sasha"), on June 10, 2001. The Obama daughters
attended the University of Chicago Laboratory Schools. When they moved to
Washington, D.C., in January 2009, the girls started at the Sidwell Friends
School. The Obamas have two Portuguese Water Dogs; the first, a male named Bo,
was a gift from Senator Ted Kennedy. In August 2013, Bo was joined by Sunny, a
female.

Applying the proceeds of a book deal, the family moved in 2005 from a Hyde Park,
Chicago condominium to a $1.6 million house in neighboring Kenwood, Chicago. The
purchase of an adjacent lot—and sale of part of it to Obama by the wife of
developer, campaign donor and friend Tony Rezko—attracted media attention
because of Rezko's subsequent indictment and conviction on political corruption
charges that were unrelated to Obama.

In December 2007, Money estimated the Obama family's net worth at $1.3 million.
Their 2009 tax return showed a household income of $5.5 million—up from about
$4.2 million in 2007 and $1.6 million in 2005—mostly from sales of his books. On
his 2010 income of $1.7 million, he gave 14% to non-profit organizations,
including $131,000 to Fisher House Foundation, a charity assisting wounded
veterans' families, allowing them to reside near where the veteran is receiving
medical treatments. As per his 2012 financial disclosure, Obama may be worth as
much as $10 million.

In reference to Obama's smoking habit, Michelle said in early 2010 that he had
quit smoking.

On his 55th birthday, August 4, 2016, Obama penned an essay in Glamour
describing how his daughters and being president have made him a feminist.

Obama is a Protestant Christian whose religious views developed in his adult
life. He wrote in The Audacity of Hope that he "was not raised in a religious
household". He described his mother, raised by non-religious parents, as being
detached from religion, yet "in many ways the most spiritually awakened person
that I have ever known." He described his father as a "confirmed atheist" by the
time his parents met, and his stepfather as "a man who saw religion as not
particularly useful." Obama explained how, through working with black churches
as a community organizer while in his twenties, he came to understand "the power
of the African-American religious tradition to spur social change."

In January 2008, Obama told Christianity Today: "I am a Christian, and I am a
devout Christian. I believe in the redemptive death and resurrection of Jesus
Christ. I believe that faith gives me a path to be cleansed of sin and have
eternal life." On September 27, 2010, Obama released a statement commenting on
his religious views saying "I'm a Christian by choice. My family didn't –
frankly, they weren't folks who went to church every week. And my mother was one
of the most spiritual people I knew, but she didn't raise me in the church. So I
came to my Christian faith later in life, and it was because the precepts of
Jesus Christ spoke to me in terms of the kind of life that I would want to lead
– being my brothers' and sisters' keeper, treating others as they would treat
me."

Obama met Trinity United Church of Christ pastor Rev. Jeremiah Wright in October
1987, and became a member of Trinity in 1992. He resigned from Trinity in May
2008 during his first presidential campaign after some of Wright's statements
were criticized. The Obama family has attended several Protestant churches since
moving to Washington, D.C., in 2009, including Shiloh Baptist Church and St.
John's Episcopal Church, as well as Evergreen Chapel at Camp David, but are not
habitual church-goers.

Two years after graduating from Columbia, Obama was hired in Chicago as director
of the Developing Communities Project, a church-based community organization
originally comprising eight Catholic parishes in Roseland, West Pullman, and
Riverdale on Chicago's South Side. He worked there as a community organizer from
June 1985 to May 1988. He helped set up a job training program, a college
preparatory tutoring program, and a tenants' rights organization in Altgeld
Gardens. Obama also worked as a consultant and instructor for the Gamaliel
Foundation, a community organizing institute. In mid-1988, he traveled for the
first time in Europe for three weeks and then for five weeks in Kenya, where he
met many of his paternal relatives for the first time.

Obama entered Harvard Law School in the fall of 1988, living in nearby
Somerville, Massachusetts. He was selected as an editor of the Harvard Law
Review at the end of his first year, president of the journal in his second
year, and research assistant to the constitutional scholar Laurence Tribe while
at Harvard for two years. During his summers, he returned to Chicago, where he
worked as an associate at the law firms of Sidley Austin in 1989 and Hopkins &
Sutter in 1990. After graduating with a JD degree magna cum laude from Harvard
in 1991, he returned to Chicago. Obama's election as the first black president
of the Harvard Law Review gained national media attention and led to a
publishing contract and advance for a book about race relations, which evolved
into a personal memoir. The manuscript was published in mid-1995 as Dreams from
My Father.

In 1991, Obama accepted a two-year position as Visiting Law and Government
Fellow at the University of Chicago Law School to work on his first book. He
then taught constitutional law at the University of Chicago Law School for
twelve years, first as a Lecturer from 1992 to 1996, and then as a Senior
Lecturer from 1996 to 2004.

From April to October 1992, Obama directed Illinois's Project Vote, a voter
registration campaign with ten staffers and seven hundred volunteer registrars;
it achieved its goal of registering 150,000 of 400,000 unregistered African
Americans in the state, leading Crain's Chicago Business to name Obama to its
1993 list of "40 under Forty" powers to be.

He joined Davis, Miner, Barnhill & Galland, a 13-attorney law firm specializing
in civil rights litigation and neighborhood economic development, where he was
an associate for three years from 1993 to 1996, then of counsel from 1996 to
2004. In 1994, he was listed as one of the lawyers in Buycks-Roberson v.
Citibank Fed. Sav. Bank, 94 C 4094 (N.D. Ill.). This class action lawsuit was
filed in 1994 with Selma Buycks-Roberson as lead plaintiff and alleged that
Citibank Federal Savings Bank had engaged in practices forbidden under the Equal
Credit Opportunity Act and the Fair Housing Act. The case was settled out of
court. Final Judgment was issued on May 13, 1998, with Citibank Federal Savings
Bank agreeing to pay attorney fees. His law license became inactive in 2007.

From 1994 to 2002, Obama served on the boards of directors of the Woods Fund of
Chicago, which in 1985 had been the first foundation to fund the Developing
Communities Project, and of the Joyce Foundation. He served on the board of
directors of the Chicago Annenberg Challenge from 1995 to 2002, as founding
president and chairman of the board of directors from 1995 to 1999.

Obama was elected to the Illinois Senate in 1996, succeeding Democratic State
Senator Alice Palmer from Illinois's 13th District, which, at that time, spanned
Chicago South Side neighborhoods from Hyde Park–Kenwood south to South Shore and
west to Chicago Lawn. Once elected, Obama gained bipartisan support for
legislation that reformed ethics and health care laws. He sponsored a law that
increased tax credits for low-income workers, negotiated welfare reform, and
promoted increased subsidies for childcare. In 2001, as co-chairman of the
bipartisan Joint Committee on Administrative Rules, Obama supported Republican
Governor Ryan's payday loan regulations and predatory mortgage lending
regulations aimed at averting home foreclosures.

He was reelected to the Illinois Senate in 1998, defeating Republican Yesse
Yehudah in the general election, and was reelected again in 2002. In 2000, he
lost a Democratic primary race for Illinois's 1st congressional district in the
United States House of Representatives to four-term incumbent Bobby Rush by a
margin of two to one.

In January 2003, Obama became chairman of the Illinois Senate's Health and Human
Services Committee when Democrats, after a decade in the minority, regained a
majority. He sponsored and led unanimous, bipartisan passage of legislation to
monitor racial profiling by requiring police to record the race of drivers they
detained, and legislation making Illinois the first state to mandate videotaping
of homicide interrogations. During his 2004 general election campaign for the
U.S. Senate, police representatives credited Obama for his active engagement
with police organizations in enacting death penalty reforms. Obama resigned from
the Illinois Senate in November 2004 following his election to the U.S. Senate.

In May 2002, Obama commissioned a poll to assess his prospects in a 2004 U.S.
Senate race. He created a campaign committee, began raising funds, and lined up
political media consultant David Axelrod by August 2002. Obama formally
announced his candidacy in January 2003.

Obama was an early opponent of the George W. Bush administration's 2003 invasion
of Iraq. On October 2, 2002, the day President Bush and Congress agreed on the
joint resolution authorizing the Iraq War, Obama addressed the first
high-profile Chicago anti-Iraq War rally, and spoke out against the war. He
addressed another anti-war rally in March 2003 and told the crowd that "it's not
too late" to stop the war.

Decisions by Republican incumbent Peter Fitzgerald and his Democratic
predecessor Carol Moseley Braun to not participate in the election resulted in
wide-open Democratic and Republican primary contests involving fifteen
candidates. In the March 2004 primary election, Obama won in an unexpected
landslide—which overnight made him a rising star within the national Democratic
Party, started speculation about a presidential future, and led to the reissue
of his memoir, Dreams from My Father. In July 2004, Obama delivered the keynote
address at the 2004 Democratic National Convention, seen by 9.1 million viewers.
His speech was well received and elevated his status within the Democratic
Party.

Obama's expected opponent in the general election, Republican primary winner
Jack Ryan, withdrew from the race in June 2004. Six weeks later, Alan Keyes
accepted the Republican nomination to replace Ryan. In the November 2004 general
election, Obama won with 70% of the vote.

Obama was sworn in as a senator on January 3, 2005, becoming the only Senate
member of the Congressional Black Caucus. CQ Weekly characterized him as a
"loyal Democrat" based on analysis of all Senate votes from 2005 to 2007. Obama
announced on November 13, 2008, that he would resign his Senate seat on November
16, 2008, before the start of the lame-duck session, to focus on his transition
period for the presidency.

Obama cosponsored the Secure America and Orderly Immigration Act. He introduced
two initiatives that bore his name: Lugar–Obama, which expanded the Nunn–Lugar
Cooperative Threat Reduction concept to conventional weapons; and the Federal
Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006, which authorized the
establishment of USAspending.gov, a web search engine on federal spending. On
June 3, 2008, Senator Obama—along with Senators Tom Carper, Tom Coburn, and John
McCain—introduced follow-up legislation: Strengthening Transparency and
Accountability in Federal Spending Act of 2008.

Obama sponsored legislation that would have required nuclear plant owners to
notify state and local authorities of radioactive leaks, but the bill failed to
pass in the full Senate after being heavily modified in committee. Regarding
tort reform, Obama voted for the Class Action Fairness Act of 2005 and the FISA
Amendments Act of 2008, which grants immunity from civil liability to
telecommunications companies complicit with NSA warrantless wiretapping
operations.

In December 2006, President Bush signed into law the Democratic Republic of the
Congo Relief, Security, and Democracy Promotion Act, marking the first federal
legislation to be enacted with Obama as its primary sponsor. In January 2007,
Obama and Senator Feingold introduced a corporate jet provision to the Honest
Leadership and Open Government Act, which was signed into law in September 2007.
Obama also introduced two unsuccessful bills: the Deceptive Practices and Voter
Intimidation Prevention Act to criminalize deceptive practices in federal
elections, and the Iraq War De-Escalation Act of 2007.

Later in 2007, Obama sponsored an amendment to the Defense Authorization Act to
add safeguards for personality-disorder military discharges. This amendment
passed the full Senate in the spring of 2008. He sponsored the Iran Sanctions
Enabling Act supporting divestment of state pension funds from Iran's oil and
gas industry, which has not passed committee; and co-sponsored legislation to
reduce risks of nuclear terrorism. Obama also sponsored a Senate amendment to
the State Children's Health Insurance Program, providing one year of job
protection for family members caring for soldiers with combat-related injuries.

Obama held assignments on the Senate Committees for Foreign Relations,
Environment and Public Works and Veterans' Affairs through December 2006. In
January 2007, he left the Environment and Public Works committee and took
additional assignments with Health, Education, Labor and Pensions and Homeland
Security and Governmental Affairs. He also became Chairman of the Senate's
subcommittee on European Affairs. As a member of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, Obama made official trips to Eastern Europe, the Middle East, Central
Asia and Africa. He met with Mahmoud Abbas before Abbas became President of the
Palestinian National Authority, and gave a speech at the University of Nairobi
in which he condemned corruption within the Kenyan government.

On February 10, 2007, Obama announced his candidacy for President of the United
States in front of the Old State Capitol building in Springfield, Illinois. The
choice of the announcement site was viewed as symbolic because it was also where
Abraham Lincoln delivered his historic "House Divided" speech in 1858. Obama
emphasized issues of rapidly ending the Iraq War, increasing energy
independence, and reforming the health care system, in a campaign that projected
themes of hope and change.

Numerous candidates entered the Democratic Party presidential primaries. The
field narrowed to a duel between Obama and Senator Hillary Clinton after early
contests, with the race remaining close throughout the primary process but with
Obama gaining a steady lead in pledged delegates due to better long-range
planning, superior fundraising, dominant organizing in caucus states, and better
exploitation of delegate allocation rules. On June 7, 2008, Clinton ended her
campaign and endorsed Obama.

On August 23, Obama announced his selection of Delaware Senator Joe Biden as his
vice presidential running mate. Obama selected Biden from a field speculated to
include former Indiana Governor and Senator Evan Bayh and Virginia Governor Tim
Kaine. At the Democratic National Convention in Denver, Colorado, Hillary
Clinton called for her supporters to endorse Obama, and she and Bill Clinton
gave convention speeches in his support. Obama delivered his acceptance speech,
not at the center where the Democratic National Convention was held, but at
Invesco Field at Mile High to a crowd of over 75,000; the speech was viewed by
over 38 million people worldwide.

During both the primary process and the general election, Obama's campaign set
numerous fundraising records, particularly in the quantity of small donations.
On June 19, 2008, Obama became the first major-party presidential candidate to
turn down public financing in the general election since the system was created
in 1976.

John McCain was nominated as the Republican candidate, and he selected Sarah
Palin as his running mate. The two candidates engaged in three presidential
debates in September and October 2008. On November 4, Obama won the presidency
with 365 electoral votes to 173 received by McCain. Obama won 52.9% of the
popular vote to McCain's 45.7%. He became the first African American to be
elected president. Obama delivered his victory speech before hundreds of
thousands of supporters in Chicago's Grant Park.

On April 4, 2011, Obama announced his reelection campaign for 2012 in a video
titled "It Begins with Us" that he posted on his website and filed election
papers with the Federal Election Commission. As the incumbent president he ran
virtually unopposed in the Democratic Party presidential primaries, and on April
3, 2012, Obama had secured the 2778 convention delegates needed to win the
Democratic nomination.

At the Democratic National Convention in Charlotte, North Carolina, Obama and
Joe Biden were formally nominated by former President Bill Clinton, as the
Democratic Party candidates for president and vice president in the general
election. Their main opponents were Republicans Mitt Romney, the former governor
of Massachusetts, and Representative Paul Ryan of Wisconsin.

On November 6, 2012, Obama won 332 electoral votes, exceeding the 270 required
for him to be reelected as president. With 51.1% of the popular vote, Obama
became the first Democratic president since Franklin D. Roosevelt to win the
majority of the popular vote twice. President Obama addressed supporters and
volunteers at Chicago's McCormick Place after his reelection and said: "Tonight
you voted for action, not politics as usual. You elected us to focus on your
jobs, not ours. And in the coming weeks and months, I am looking forward to
reaching out and working with leaders of both parties."

The inauguration of Barack Obama as the 44th President took place on January 20,
2009. In his first few days in office, Obama issued executive orders and
presidential memoranda directing the U.S. military to develop plans to withdraw
troops from Iraq. He ordered the closing of the Guantanamo Bay detention camp,
but Congress prevented the closure by refusing to appropriate the required funds
and preventing moving any Guantanamo detainee into the U.S. or to other
countries. Obama reduced the secrecy given to presidential records. He also
revoked President George W. Bush's restoration of President Ronald Reagan's
Mexico City Policy prohibiting federal aid to international family planning
organizations that perform or provide counseling about abortion.

The first bill signed into law by Obama was the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of
2009, relaxing the statute of limitations for equal-pay lawsuits. Five days
later, he signed the reauthorization of the State Children's Health Insurance
Program (SCHIP) to cover an additional 4 million uninsured children. In March
2009, Obama reversed a Bush-era policy that had limited funding of embryonic
stem cell research and pledged to develop "strict guidelines" on the research.

Obama appointed two women to serve on the Supreme Court in the first two years
of his Presidency. He nominated Sonia Sotomayor on May 26, 2009 to replace
retiring Associate Justice David Souter; she was confirmed on August 6, 2009,
becoming the first Supreme Court Justice of Hispanic descent. Obama nominated
Elena Kagan on May 10, 2010 to replace retiring Associate Justice John Paul
Stevens. She was confirmed on August 5, 2010, bringing the number of women
sitting simultaneously on the Court to three justices for the first time in
American history.

On March 30, 2010, Obama signed the Health Care and Education Reconciliation
Act, a reconciliation bill that ended the process of the federal government
giving subsidies to private banks to give out federally insured loans, increased
the Pell Grant scholarship award, and made changes to the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act.

In a major space policy speech in April 2010, Obama announced a planned change
in direction at NASA, the U.S. space agency. He ended plans for a return of
human spaceflight to the moon and development of the Ares I rocket, Ares V
rocket and Constellation program, in favor of funding Earth science projects, a
new rocket type, and research and development for an eventual manned mission to
Mars, and ongoing missions to the International Space Station.

President Obama's 2011 State of the Union Address focused on themes of education
and innovation, stressing the importance of innovation economics to make the
United States more competitive globally. He spoke of a five-year freeze in
domestic spending, eliminating tax breaks for oil companies and reversing tax
cuts for the wealthiest Americans, banning congressional earmarks, and reducing
healthcare costs. He promised that the United States would have one million
electric vehicles on the road by 2015 and would be 80% reliant on "clean"
electricity.

On October 8, 2009, Obama signed the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. Hate
Crimes Prevention Act, a measure that expanded the 1969 United States federal
hate-crime law to include crimes motivated by a victim's actual or perceived
gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, or disability.

On October 30, 2009, Obama lifted the ban on travel to the United States by
those infected with HIV, which was celebrated by Immigration Equality.

On December 22, 2010, Obama signed the Don't Ask, Don't Tell Repeal Act of 2010,
which fulfilled a key promise made in the 2008 presidential campaign to end the
Don't ask, don't tell policy of 1993 that had prevented gay and lesbian people
from serving openly in the United States Armed Forces. In 2016, the Pentagon
ended the policy that also barred transgender people from serving openly in the
military.

As a candidate for the Illinois state senate in 1996, Obama had said that he
favored legalizing same-sex marriage. By the time of his Senate run in 2004, he
said that he supported civil unions and domestic partnerships for same-sex
partners, but he opposed same-sex marriages for strategic reasons. On May 9,
2012, shortly after the official launch of his campaign for re-election as
president, Obama said his views had evolved, and he publicly affirmed his
personal support for the legalization of same-sex marriage, becoming the first
sitting U.S. president to do so.

During his second inaugural address on January 21, 2013, Obama became the first
president to call for full equality for gay Americans: "Our journey is not
complete until our gay brothers and sisters are treated like anyone else under
the law – for if we are truly created equal, then surely the love we commit to
one another must be equal as well." This was the first time that a president
mentioned gay rights or the word "gay" in an inaugural address. In 2013, the
Obama administration filed briefs that urged the Supreme Court to rule in favor
of same-sex couples in the cases of Hollingsworth v. Perry (regarding same-sex
marriage) and United States v. Windsor (regarding the Defense of Marriage Act).
Then, following the Supreme Court's 2015 decision in Obergefell v. Hodges
(ruling same-sex marriage to be a fundamental right), Obama asserted that, "This
decision affirms what millions of Americans already believe in their hearts:
When all Americans are treated as equal we are all more free."

On July 30, 2015 the White House Office of National AIDS Policy revised its
strategy for addressing the ailment, which included widespread testing and
linkage to healthcare, which was celebrated by the Human Rights Campaign.

On March 11, 2009, Obama created the White House Council on Women and Girls,
which forms part of the Office of Intergovernmental Affairs, having been
established by Executive Order 13506 with a broad mandate to advise him on
issues relating to the welfare of American women and girls. The Council is
currently chaired by Senior Advisor to the President Valerie Jarrett. Obama also
established the White House Task Force to Protect Students from Sexual Assault
through an official United States government memorandum on January 22, 2014,
with a broad mandate to advise him on issues relating to sexual assault on
college and university campuses throughout the United States. The current
co-chairs of the Task Force are Vice President Joe Biden and Jarrett. The Task
Force has been a development out of the White House Council on Women and Girls
and Office of the Vice President of the United States, and prior to that, the
1994 Violence Against Women Act that was first-drafted by Biden.

On February 17, 2009, Obama signed the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009, a $787 billion economic stimulus package aimed at helping the economy
recover from the deepening worldwide recession. The act includes increased
federal spending for health care, infrastructure, education, various tax breaks
and incentives, and direct assistance to individuals.

In March, Obama's Treasury Secretary, Timothy Geithner, took further steps to
manage the financial crisis, including introducing the Public–Private Investment
Program for Legacy Assets, which contains provisions for buying up to
two trillion dollars in depreciated real estate assets. Obama intervened in the
troubled automotive industry in March 2009, renewing loans for General Motors
and Chrysler to continue operations while reorganizing. Over the following
months the White House set terms for both firms' bankruptcies, including the
sale of Chrysler to Italian automaker Fiat and a reorganization of GM giving the
U.S. government a temporary 60% equity stake in the company, with the Canadian
government taking a 12% stake. In June 2009, dissatisfied with the pace of
economic stimulus, Obama called on his cabinet to accelerate the investment. He
signed into law the Car Allowance Rebate System, known colloquially as "Cash for
Clunkers", that temporarily boosted the economy.

Spending and loan guarantees from the Federal Reserve and the Treasury
Department authorized by the Bush and Obama administrations totaled about
$11.5 trillion, but only $3 trillion was spent by the end of November 2009.
Obama and the Congressional Budget Office predicted the 2010 budget deficit
would be $1.5 trillion or 10.6% of the nation's gross domestic product (GDP)
compared to the 2009 deficit of $1.4 trillion or 9.9% of GDP. For 2011, the
administration predicted the deficit will shrink to $1.34 trillion, and the
10-year deficit will increase to $8.53 trillion or 90% of GDP. The most recent
increase in the U.S. debt ceiling to $17.2 trillion took effect in February
2014. On August 2, 2011, after a lengthy congressional debate over whether to
raise the nation's debt limit, Obama signed the bipartisan Budget Control Act of
2011. The legislation enforces limits on discretionary spending until 2021,
establishes a procedure to increase the debt limit, creates a Congressional
Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction to propose further deficit reduction
with a stated goal of achieving at least $1.5 trillion in budgetary savings over
10 years, and establishes automatic procedures for reducing spending by as much
as $1.2 trillion if legislation originating with the new joint select committee
does not achieve such savings. By passing the legislation, Congress was able to
prevent a U.S. government default on its obligations.

As it did throughout 2008, the unemployment rate rose in 2009, reaching a peak
in October at 10.0% and averaging 10.0% in the fourth quarter. Following a
decrease to 9.7% in the first quarter of 2010, the unemployment rate fell to
9.6% in the second quarter, where it remained for the rest of the year. Between
February and December 2010, employment rose by 0.8%, which was less than the
average of 1.9% experienced during comparable periods in the past four
employment recoveries. By November 2012, the unemployment rate fell to 7.7%,
decreasing to 6.7% in the last month of 2013. During 2014, the unemployment rate
continued to decline, falling to 6.3% in the first quarter. GDP growth returned
in the third quarter of 2009, expanding at a rate of 1.6%, followed by a 5.0%
increase in the fourth quarter. Growth continued in 2010, posting an increase of
3.7% in the first quarter, with lesser gains throughout the rest of the year. In
July 2010, the Federal Reserve noted that economic activity continued to
increase, but its pace had slowed, and chairman Ben Bernanke said the economic
outlook was "unusually uncertain". Overall, the economy expanded at a rate of
2.9% in 2010.

The Congressional Budget Office and a broad range of economists credit Obama's
stimulus plan for economic growth. The CBO released a report stating that the
stimulus bill increased employment by 1–2.1 million, while conceding that "It is
impossible to determine how many of the reported jobs would have existed in the
absence of the stimulus package." Although an April 2010 survey of members of
the National Association for Business Economics showed an increase in job
creation (over a similar January survey) for the first time in two years, 73% of
68 respondents believed that the stimulus bill has had no impact on employment.
The economy of the United States has grown faster than the other original NATO
members by a wider margin under President Obama than it has anytime since the
end of World War II. The OECD credits the much faster growth in the United
States to the stimulus in the United States and the austerity measures in the
European Union.

Within a month of the 2010 midterm elections, Obama announced a compromise deal
with the Congressional Republican leadership that included a temporary, two-year
extension of the 2001 and 2003 income tax rates, a one-year payroll tax
reduction, continuation of unemployment benefits, and a new rate and exemption
amount for estate taxes. The compromise overcame opposition from some in both
parties, and the resulting $858 billion Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance
Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010 passed with bipartisan majorities
in both houses of Congress before Obama signed it on December 17, 2010.

In December 2013, Obama declared that growing income inequality is a "defining
challenge of our time" and called on Congress to bolster the safety net and
raise wages. This came on the heels of the nationwide strikes of fast-food
workers and Pope Francis' criticism of inequality and trickle-down economics.

Obama has urged Congress to ratify a 12-nation free trade pact called the
Trans-Pacific Partnership.

On September 30, 2009, the Obama administration proposed new regulations on
power plants, factories, and oil refineries in an attempt to limit greenhouse
gas emissions and to curb global warming.

On April 20, 2010, an explosion destroyed an offshore drilling rig at the
Macondo Prospect in the Gulf of Mexico, causing a major sustained oil leak.
Obama visited the Gulf, announced a federal investigation, and formed a
bipartisan commission to recommend new safety standards, after a review by
Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar and concurrent Congressional hearings. He
then announced a six-month moratorium on new deepwater drilling permits and
leases, pending regulatory review. As multiple efforts by BP failed, some in the
media and public expressed confusion and criticism over various aspects of the
incident, and stated a desire for more involvement by Obama and the federal
government.

In July 2013, Obama expressed reservations and stated he "would reject the
Keystone XL pipeline if it increased carbon pollution" or "greenhouse
emissions". Obama's advisers called for a halt to petroleum exploration in the
Arctic in January 2013. On February 24, 2015, Obama vetoed a bill that would
authorize the pipeline. It was the third veto of Obama's presidency and his
first major veto.

Obama has emphasized the conservation of federal lands during his term in
office. He used his power under the Antiquities Act to create 25 new national
monuments during his presidency and expand four others, protecting a total of
553,000,000 acres (224,000,000 ha) of federal lands and waters, more than any
other U.S. president.

Obama called for Congress to pass legislation reforming health care in the
United States, a key campaign promise and a top legislative goal. He proposed an
expansion of health insurance coverage to cover the uninsured, to cap premium
increases, and to allow people to retain their coverage when they leave or
change jobs. His proposal was to spend $900 billion over 10 years and include a
government insurance plan, also known as the public option, to compete with the
corporate insurance sector as a main component to lowering costs and improving
quality of health care. It would also make it illegal for insurers to drop sick
people or deny them coverage for pre-existing conditions, and require every
American to carry health coverage. The plan also includes medical spending cuts
and taxes on insurance companies that offer expensive plans.

On July 14, 2009, House Democratic leaders introduced a 1,017-page plan for
overhauling the U.S. health care system, which Obama wanted Congress to approve
by the end of 2009. After much public debate during the Congressional summer
recess of 2009, Obama delivered a speech to a joint session of Congress on
September 9 where he addressed concerns over the proposals. In March 2009, Obama
lifted a ban on using federal funds for stem cell research.

On November 7, 2009, a health care bill featuring the public option was passed
in the House. On December 24, 2009, the Senate passed its own bill—without a
public option—on a party-line vote of 60–39. On March 21, 2010, the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) passed by the Senate in December was
passed in the House by a vote of 219 to 212. Obama signed the bill into law on
March 23, 2010.

The ACA includes health-related provisions, most of which took effect in 2014,
including expanding Medicaid eligibility for people making up to 133% of the
federal poverty level (FPL) starting in 2014, subsidizing insurance premiums for
people making up to 400% of the FPL ($88,000 for family of four in 2010) so
their maximum "out-of-pocket" payment for annual premiums will be from 2% to
9.5% of income, providing incentives for businesses to provide health care
benefits, prohibiting denial of coverage and denial of claims based on
pre-existing conditions, establishing health insurance exchanges, prohibiting
annual coverage caps, and support for medical research. According to White House
and Congressional Budget Office figures, the maximum share of income that
enrollees would have to pay would vary depending on their income relative to the
federal poverty level.

The costs of these provisions are offset by taxes, fees, and cost-saving
measures, such as new Medicare taxes for those in high-income brackets, taxes on
indoor tanning, cuts to the Medicare Advantage program in favor of traditional
Medicare, and fees on medical devices and pharmaceutical companies; there is
also a tax penalty for those who do not obtain health insurance, unless they are
exempt due to low income or other reasons. In March 2010, the Congressional
Budget Office estimated that the net effect of both laws will be a reduction in
the federal deficit by $143 billion over the first decade.

The law faced several legal challenges, primarily based on the argument that an
individual mandate requiring Americans to buy health insurance was
unconstitutional. On June 28, 2012, the Supreme Court ruled by a 5–4 vote in
National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius that the mandate was
constitutional under the U.S. Congress's taxing authority. In Burwell v. Hobby
Lobby the Court ruled that "closely-held" for-profit corporations could be
exempt on religious grounds under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act from
regulations adopted under the ACA that would have required them to pay for
insurance that covered certain contraceptives. In June 2015, the Court ruled 6–3
in King v. Burwell that subsidies to help individuals and families purchase
health insurance were authorized for those doing so on both the federal exchange
and state exchanges, not only those purchasing plans "established by the State",
as the statute reads.

Prior to June 2014, Obama offered substantial support for a broadly-based "All
of the above" approach to domestic energy policy, which Obama has maintained
since his first term and which he last confirmed at his State of the Union
speech in January 2014 to a mixed reception by both parties. In June 2014, Obama
made indications that his administration would consider a shift towards an
energy policy more closely tuned to the manufacturing industry and its impact on
the domestic economy. Obama's approach of selectively combining regulation and
incentive to various issues in the domestic energy policy such as coal mining
and oil fracking has received mixed commentary for not being as responsive to
the needs of the domestic manufacturing sector as needed, following claims that
the domestic manufacturing sector utilizes as much as a third of the nation's
available energy resources.

On January 16, 2013, one month after the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting,
Obama signed 23 executive orders and outlined a series of sweeping proposals
regarding gun control. He urged Congress to reintroduce an expired ban on
military-style assault weapons, such as those used in several recent mass
shootings, impose limits on ammunition magazines to 10 rounds, introduce
background checks on all gun sales, pass a ban on possession and sale of
armor-piercing bullets, introduce harsher penalties for gun-traffickers,
especially unlicensed dealers who buy arms for criminals and approving the
appointment of the head of the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and
Explosives for the first time since 2006. On January 5, 2016, Obama announced
new executive actions extending background check requirements to more gun
sellers. In a 2016 editorial in the New York Times, Obama compared the struggle
for what he termed "common-sense gun reform" to women's suffrage and other civil
rights movements in American history.

Obama called the November 2, 2010 election, where the Democratic Party lost 63
seats in, and control of, the House of Representatives, "humbling" and a
"shellacking". He said that the results came because not enough Americans had
felt the effects of the economic recovery.

On November 10, 2014, President Obama recommended the Federal Communications
Commission reclassify broadband Internet service as a telecommunications service
in order to preserve net neutrality. On February 12, 2013, President Obama
signed Executive Order 13636, "Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity".

In February and March 2009, Vice President Joe Biden and Secretary of State
Hillary Rodham Clinton made separate overseas trips to announce a "new era" in
U.S. foreign relations with Russia and Europe, using the terms "break" and
"reset" to signal major changes from the policies of the preceding
administration. Obama attempted to reach out to Arab leaders by granting his
first interview to an Arab cable TV network, Al Arabiya.

On March 19, Obama continued his outreach to the Muslim world, releasing a New
Year's video message to the people and government of Iran. In April, Obama gave
a speech in Ankara, Turkey, which was well received by many Arab governments. On
June 4, 2009, Obama delivered a speech at Cairo University in Egypt calling for
"A New Beginning" in relations between the Islamic world and the United States
and promoting Middle East peace.

On June 26, 2009, Obama responded to the Iranian government's actions towards
protesters following Iran's 2009 presidential election by saying: "The violence
perpetrated against them is outrageous. We see it and we condemn it." While in
Moscow on July 7, he responded Vice President Biden's comment on a possible
Israeli military strike on Iran by saying: "We have said directly to the
Israelis that it is important to try and resolve this in an international
setting in a way that does not create major conflict in the Middle East."

On September 24, 2009, Obama became the first sitting U.S. president to preside
over a meeting of the United Nations Security Council.

In March 2010, Obama took a public stance against plans by the government of
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to continue building Jewish housing
projects in predominantly Arab neighborhoods of East Jerusalem. During the same
month, an agreement was reached with the administration of Russian President
Dmitry Medvedev to replace the 1991 Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty with a new
pact reducing the number of long-range nuclear weapons in the arsenals of both
countries by about one-third. Obama and Medvedev signed the New START treaty in
April 2010, and the U.S. Senate ratified it in December 2010.

In December 2011, Obama instructed agencies to consider LGBT rights when issuing
financial aid to foreign countries. He criticized Russia's law discriminating
against gays in August 2013, stopping short of advocating a boycott of the 2014
Winter Olympics held in Sochi, Russia.

In December 2014, Obama announced that he intended to normalize relationships
between Cuba and the United States. The countries' respective "interests
sections" in one another's capitals were upgraded to embassies on July 20, 2015.

In March 2015, Obama declared that he had authorized U.S. forces to provide
logistical and intelligence support to the Saudis in their military intervention
in Yemen, establishing a "Joint Planning Cell" with Saudi Arabia.

Before leaving office, Obama said German Chancellor Angela Merkel had been his
"closest international partner" throughout his tenure as President.

On February 27, 2009, Obama announced that combat operations in Iraq would end
within 18 months. His remarks were made to a group of Marines preparing for
deployment to Afghanistan. Obama said, "Let me say this as plainly as I can: by
August 31, 2010, our combat mission in Iraq will end." The Obama administration
scheduled the withdrawal of combat troops to be completed by August 2010,
decreasing troop's levels from 142,000 while leaving a transitional force of
about 50,000 in Iraq until the end of 2011. On August 19, 2010, the last U.S.
combat brigade exited Iraq. Remaining troops transitioned from combat operations
to counter-terrorism and the training, equipping, and advising of Iraqi security
forces. On August 31, 2010, Obama announced that the United States combat
mission in Iraq was over. On October 21, 2011 President Obama announced that all
U.S. troops would leave Iraq in time to be "home for the holidays".

In June 2014, following the capture of Mosul by Daesh, Obama sent 275 troops to
provide support and security for U.S. personnel and the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad.
Daesh continued to gain ground and to commit widespread massacres and ethnic
cleansing.

In August 2014, during the Sinjar massacre, Obama ordered a campaign of U.S.
airstrikes against Daesh.

By the end of 2014, 3,100 American ground troops were committed to the conflict
and 16,000 sorties were flown over the battlefield, primarily by U.S. Air Force
and Navy pilots.

In the spring of 2015, with the addition of the "Panther Brigade" of the 82nd
Airborne Division the number of U.S. ground troops in Iraq surged to 4,400, and
by July American-led coalition air forces counted 44,000 sorties over the
battlefield.

Early in his presidency, Obama moved to bolster U.S. troop strength in
Afghanistan. He announced an increase in U.S. troop levels to 17,000 military
personnel in February 2009 to "stabilize a deteriorating situation in
Afghanistan", an area he said had not received the "strategic attention,
direction and resources it urgently requires". He replaced the military
commander in Afghanistan, General David D. McKiernan, with former Special Forces
commander Lt. Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal in May 2009, indicating that
McChrystal's Special Forces experience would facilitate the use of
counterinsurgency tactics in the war. On December 1, 2009, Obama announced the
deployment of an additional 30,000 military personnel to Afghanistan and
proposed to begin troop withdrawals 18 months from that date; this took place in
July 2011. David Petraeus replaced McChrystal in June 2010, after McChrystal's
staff criticized White House personnel in a magazine article. In February 2013,
Obama said the U.S. military would reduce the troop level in Afghanistan from
68,000 to 34,000 U.S. troops by February 2014.

In October 2015, the White House announced a plan to keep U.S. Forces in
Afghanistan indefinitely in light of the deteriorating security situation.

In 2011, the United States vetoed a Security Council resolution condemning
Israeli settlements, with the United States being the only nation to do so.
Obama supports the two-state solution to the Arab–Israeli conflict based on the
1967 borders with land swaps.

In June 2011, Obama said that the bond between the United States and Israel is
"unbreakable". During the initial years of the Obama administration, the U.S.
increased military cooperation with Israel, including increased military aid,
re-establishment of the U.S.-Israeli Joint Political Military Group and the
Defense Policy Advisory Group, and an increase in visits among high-level
military officials of both countries. The Obama administration asked Congress to
allocate money toward funding the Iron Dome program in response to the waves of
Palestinian rocket attacks on Israel.

In 2013, Jeffrey Goldberg reported that, in Obama's view, "with each new
settlement announcement, Netanyahu is moving his country down a path toward
near-total isolation."

In 2014, Obama likened the Zionist movement to the Civil Rights Movement in the
United States. He said that both movements seek to bring justice and equal
rights to historically persecuted peoples. He explained, "To me, being
pro-Israel and pro-Jewish is part and parcel with the values that I've been
fighting for since I was politically conscious and started getting involved in
politics." Obama expressed support for Israel's right to defend itself during
the 2014 Israel–Gaza conflict.

On December 23, 2016 under the Obama Administration, the United States abstained
from United Nations Security Council Resolution 2334, effectively allowing it to
pass. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu strongly criticized the
Adminsitration's actions, and the Israeli government withdrew its annual dues
from the organization, which totaled $6 million in United States dollars, on
January 6, 2017. On January 5, 2017, the United States House of Representatives
voted 342–80 to condemn the UN Resolution.

In February 2011, protests in Libya began against long-time dictator Muammar
Gaddafi as part of the Arab Spring. They soon turned violent. In March, as
forces loyal to Gaddafi advanced on rebels across Libya, calls for a no-fly zone
came from around the world, including Europe, the Arab League, and a resolution
passed unanimously by the U.S. Senate. In response to the unanimous passage of
United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973 on March 17, Gaddafi—who had
previously vowed to "show no mercy" to the rebels of Benghazi—announced an
immediate cessation of military activities, yet reports came in that his forces
continued shelling Misrata. The next day, on Obama's orders, the U.S. military
took part in air strikes to destroy the Libyan government's air defense
capabilities to protect civilians and enforce a no-fly-zone, including the use
of Tomahawk missiles, B-2 Spirits, and fighter jets. Six days later, on March
25, by unanimous vote of all of its 28 members, NATO took over leadership of the
effort, dubbed Operation Unified Protector. Some Representatives questioned
whether Obama had the constitutional authority to order military action in
addition to questioning its cost, structure and aftermath.

On August 18, 2011, several months after the start of the Syrian Civil War,
Obama issued a written statement that said: "The time has come for President
Assad to step aside." This stance was reaffirmed in November 2015. In 2012,
Obama authorized multiple programs run by the CIA and the Pentagon to train
anti-Assad rebels. The Pentagon-run program was later found to have failed and
was formally abandoned in October 2015.

In the wake of a chemical weapons attack in Syria, formally blamed by the Obama
administration on the Assad government, Obama chose not to enforce the "red
line" he had pledged and, rather than authorise the promised military action
against Assad, went along with the Russia-brokered deal that led to Assad giving
up chemical weapons; however attacks with chlorine gas continued. In 2014, Obama
authorized an air campaign aimed primarily at ISIL, but repeatedly promised that
the U.S. would not deploy ground troops in Syria.

Starting with information received from Central Intelligence Agency operatives
in July 2010, the CIA developed intelligence over the next several months that
determined what they believed to be the hideout of Osama bin Laden. He was
living in seclusion in a large compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan, a suburban area
35 miles (56 km) from Islamabad. CIA head Leon Panetta reported this
intelligence to President Obama in March 2011. Meeting with his national
security advisers over the course of the next six weeks, Obama rejected a plan
to bomb the compound, and authorized a "surgical raid" to be conducted by United
States Navy SEALs. The operation took place on May 1, 2011, and resulted in the
shooting death of bin Laden and the seizure of papers, computer drives and disks
from the compound. DNA testing was one of five methods used to positively
identify bin Laden's corpse, which was buried at sea several hours later. Within
minutes of the President's announcement from Washington, DC, late in the evening
on May 1, there were spontaneous celebrations around the country as crowds
gathered outside the White House, and at New York City's Ground Zero and Times
Square. Reaction to the announcement was positive across party lines, including
from former presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush, and from many countries
around the world.

In November 2013, Obama's administration opened negotiations with Iran to
prevent it from acquiring nuclear weapons, which included an interim agreement.
Negotiations took two years with numerous delays, with a deal being announced
July 14, 2015. The deal, titled the "Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action", saw
the removal of sanctions in exchange for measures that would prevent Iran from
producing nuclear weapons. While Obama hailed the agreement as being a step
towards a more hopeful world, the deal drew strong criticism from Republican and
conservative quarters, and from Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu.

Since the spring of 2013, secret meetings were conducted between the United
States and Cuba in the neutral locations of Canada and Vatican City. The Vatican
first became involved in 2013 when Pope Francis advised the U.S. and Cuba to
exchange prisoners as a gesture of goodwill. On December 10, 2013, Cuban
President Raúl Castro, in a significant public moment, greeted and shook hands
with Obama at the Nelson Mandela memorial service in Johannesburg.

In December 2014, after the secret meetings, it was announced that Obama, with
Pope Francis as an intermediary, had negotiated a restoration of relations with
Cuba, after nearly sixty years of détente. Popularly dubbed the Cuban Thaw, The
New Republic deemed the Cuban Thaw to be "Obama's finest foreign policy
achievement". On July 1, 2015, President Barack Obama announced that formal
diplomatic relations between Cuba and the United States would resume, and
embassies would be opened in Washington and Havana. The countries' respective
"interests sections" in one another's capitals were upgraded to embassies on
July 20 and August 13, 2015, respectively.

Obama visited Havana, Cuba for two days in March 2016, becoming the first
sitting U.S. President to arrive since Calvin Coolidge in 1928.

Obama spoke in front of the African Union in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, on July 29,
2015, the first sitting U.S. president to do so. He gave a speech encouraging
the world to increase economic ties via investments and trade with the
continent, and lauded the progresses made in education, infrastructure, and
economy. He also criticized the lack of democracy and leaders who refuse to step
aside, discrimination against minorities (LGBT people, religious groups and
ethnicities), and corruption. He suggested an intensified democratization and
free trade, to significantly improve the quality of life for Africans. During
his July 2015 trip, Obama also was the first U.S. president ever to visit Kenya,
which is the homeland of his father.

On May 27, 2016, 2½ months before the 71st anniversary of the U.S. atomic
bombing of Hiroshima that ended World War II, Obama became the first sitting
American president to visit Hiroshima, Japan. Accompanied by Japanese Prime
Minister Shinzo Abe, Obama paid tribute to the victims of the bombing at the
Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum.

After Russia's invasion of Crimea in 2014, military intervention in Syria in
2015, and the alleged interference in the 2016 U.S. presidential election,
Obama's Russia policy was widely seen as a failure. George Robertson, a former
UK defense secretary and NATO secretary-general, said that Obama had "allowed
Putin to jump back on the world stage and test the resolve of the West", adding
that the legacy of this disaster would last.

Obama's family history, upbringing, and Ivy League education differ markedly
from those of African-American politicians who launched their careers in the
1960s through participation in the civil rights movement. Expressing puzzlement
over questions about whether he is "black enough", Obama told an August 2007
meeting of the National Association of Black Journalists that "we're still
locked in this notion that if you appeal to white folks then there must be
something wrong." Obama acknowledged his youthful image in an October 2007
campaign speech, saying: "I wouldn't be here if, time and again, the torch had
not been passed to a new generation."

Obama is frequently referred to as an exceptional orator. During his
pre-inauguration transition period and continuing into his presidency, Obama has
delivered a series of weekly Internet video addresses. Former presidential
campaign surrogate and Georgetown professor, Michael Eric Dyson, is both
critical and sympathetic of President Obama's leadership in race relations,
indicating that Obama's speeches and action on racial disparity and justice have
been somewhat reactive and reluctant when, especially in the later part of his
second term, racial violence demanded immediate presidential action and
conversation.

According to the Gallup Organization, Obama began his presidency with a 68%
approval rating before gradually declining for the rest of the year, and
eventually bottoming out at 41% in August 2010, a trend similar to Ronald
Reagan's and Bill Clinton's first years in office. He experienced a small poll
bounce shortly after the death of Osama bin Laden on May 2, 2011. This bounce
lasted until around June 2011, when his approval numbers dropped back to where
they were previously. His approval ratings rebounded around the same time as his
reelection in 2012, with polls showing an average job approval of 52% shortly
after his second inauguration. Despite approval ratings dropping to 39% in
late-2013 due to the ACA roll-out, they climbed to 50% in January 2015 according
to Gallup.

Polls showed strong support for Obama in other countries both before and during
his presidency. In a February 2009 poll conducted in Western Europe and the U.S.
by Harris Interactive for France 24 and the International Herald Tribune, Obama
was rated as the most respected world leader, as well as the most powerful. In a
similar poll conducted by Harris in May 2009, Obama was rated as the most
popular world leader, as well as the one figure most people would pin their
hopes on for pulling the world out of the economic downturn.

Obama won Best Spoken Word Album Grammy Awards for abridged audiobook versions
of Dreams from My Father in February 2006 and for The Audacity of Hope in
February 2008. His concession speech after the New Hampshire primary was set to
music by independent artists as the music video "Yes We Can", which was viewed
10 million times on YouTube in its first month and received a Daytime Emmy
Award. In December 2008 and in 2012, Time magazine named Obama as its Person of
the Year. The 2008 awarding was for his historic candidacy and election, which
Time described as "the steady march of seemingly impossible accomplishments". On
May 25, 2011, Obama became the first President of the United States to address
both houses of the UK Parliament in Westminster Hall, London. This was only the
fifth occurrence since the start of the 20th century, of a head of state being
extended this invitation, following Charles de Gaulle in 1960, Nelson Mandela in
1996, Queen Elizabeth II in 2002 and Pope Benedict XVI in 2010.

On October 9, 2009, the Norwegian Nobel Committee announced that Obama had won
the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize "for his extraordinary efforts to strengthen
international diplomacy and cooperation between peoples". Obama accepted this
award in Oslo, Norway on December 10, 2009, with "deep gratitude and great
humility." The award drew a mixture of praise and criticism from world leaders
and media figures. Obama's peace prize was called a "stunning surprise" by The
New York Times. Obama is the fourth U.S. president to be awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize and the third to become a Nobel laureate while in office. Obama's Nobel
Prize has been viewed skeptically in subsequent years, especially after the
director of the Nobel Institute, Geir Lundestad, said Obama's Peace Prize did
not have the desired effect.

Barack Obama's presidency ended at noon on January 20, 2017, immediately
following the inauguration of his Republican successor, Donald Trump. After the
inauguration, Obama lifted off on Executive One, circled the White House, and
flew to Joint Base Andrews. The family rented a house in Kalorama, Washington,
D.C.

During the 2017 Democratic National Committee chairmanship election, the Obama
administration pushed for Tom Perez to run against Keith Ellison and President
Barack Obama personally called DNC members to vote for Perez.

On March 2, 2017, the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum awarded
the annual Profile in Courage Award to Obama "for his enduring commitment to
democratic ideals and elevating the standard of political courage."

The Obama Presidential Center is the planned presidential library of Barack
Obama. The center will be hosted by the University of Chicago, and will be
located in Jackson Park on the South Side of Chicago, Illinois. Once completed,
it will become the 14th site in the National Archives and Records
Administration's presidential library system.

Obama's most significant legacy is generally considered to be the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act, which went into effect from 2010 to 2020.
Together with the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act amendment, it
represents the most significant regulatory overhaul of the U.S. healthcare
system since the passage of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965. Obama succeeded in
passing major healthcare reform where his Democratic predecessor, US President
Bill Clinton, had failed to do so in attempting to pass the Health Security
Act.[citation needed]

According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Obama administration
created 11.3 million jobs from the month after the first inauguration of Barack
Obama to the end of his term.

In 2010, President Obama signed into effect the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform
and Consumer Protection Act. Passed as a response to the financial crisis of
2007–2008, it brought the most significant changes to financial regulation in
the United States since the regulatory reform that followed the Great Depression
under Democratic President Franklin D. Roosevelt.[citation needed]

In 2011, the Don't Ask, Don't Tell Repeal Act of 2010 went into effect, bringing
an end to "don't ask, don't tell" policy in the US armed forces that banned open
service from LGB people. Obama succeeded in allowing open military service for
LGB people in the US armed forces where his Democratic predecessor, US President
Bill Clinton, had failed to do so, the Clinton administration having instead
enacted a comprise, the "don't ask, don't tell" policy. In 2016, the Obama
administration brought an end to the ban on transgender people serving openly in
the US armed forces. The Obama administration saw the largest expansion of civil
rights in US armed forces since Democratic US President Harry Truman's Executive
Order 9981, which ended racial segregation in the US armed forces in the early
1950s.[citation needed]

President Obama continued the drone strikes that President George W. Bush
started during his presidency in Afghanistan, Iraq, Pakistan, Somalia, and
Yemen. Obama also ordered drone strikes in Libya in 2011, the Philippines in
2012, and Syria in 2014. Obama left about 9,800 US troops in Afghanistan, 5,262
US troops in Iraq, 503 US troops in Syria, 133 US troops in Pakistan, 106 US
troops in Somalia, 7 US troops in Yemen, and 2 US troops in Libya at the end of
his presidency.

According to Pew Research Center and United States Bureau of Justice Statistics,
from December 31, 2009 to December 31, 2015, that inmates sentenced in US
federal custody declined by 5% under US President Obama. This is the largest
decline in sentenced inmates in US federal custody since Democrat US President
Jimmy Carter. By contrast, the federal prison population increased significantly
under US president Ronald Reagan, George H. W. Bush, Bill Clinton, and George W.
Bush.

A 2017 C-SPAN Presidential Historians Survey ranked Obama as the 12th best US
president.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marco_Polo_(TV_series)

Marco Polo is an American drama web television series inspired by Marco Polo's
early years in the court of Kublai Khan, the Khagan of the Mongol Empire and the
founder of the Yuan dynasty (1271–1368). The show premiered on Netflix on
December 12, 2014. The series was written and created by John Fusco and stars
Lorenzo Richelmy in the title role with Benedict Wong as Kublai Khan. The series
is produced by The Weinstein Company. On January 7, 2015, Marco Polo was renewed
by Netflix for a 10-episode second season, which premiered on July 1, 2016.

On December 12, 2016, Netflix announced they had canceled Marco Polo after two
seasons. Sources told The Hollywood Reporter, the series' two seasons resulted
in a $200 million loss for Netflix, and the decision to cancel the series was
jointly taken by Netflix and The Weinstein Company.

The series was originally developed at Starz, which had picked up the series in
January 2012. After attempts to film in China failed, the project was released
back to The Weinstein Company. Netflix then picked up the series for a
10-episode season, for approximately $90 million, making it one of the most
expensive TV shows in the world, second to Game of Thrones. The project was
officially announced at Netflix in January 2014. Joachim Rønning and Espen
Sandberg serve as executive producers and directed the pilot and second
episodes, "The Wayfarer" and "The Wolf and the Deer", respectively. The series
was filmed in Italy, Kazakhstan, and at Pinewood Studios in Malaysia.

Stuntman Ju Kun was working on the show alongside fight choreographer Brett
Chan, but went missing with the disappearance of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH370
during pre-production.

To prepare for her role as Chabi, Joan Chen read the book The Secret History of
the Mongol Queens by Jack Weatherford, as she wanted her performance to reflect
the culture of the time period.

During his extensive research, show creator John Fusco traveled the Silk Road by
horseback and also crossed the Ming Sha Dunes of Western China on camel. In
Venice, Italy he sought out and studied the Last Will and Testament of Marco
Polo. While some Mongolian viewers and experts view it as "riddled with
historical errors", many have praised the series. Orgil Narangerel, who played
Genghis Khan in a BBC documentary, said it was more accurate than any previous
foreign portrayal of Mongolian culture. "As a Mongol and an artist, 'Marco Polo'
makes me feel like our dreams are coming true," he told AFP. "I watched all 10
episodes in just one day.".

The series featured music by Mongolian bands Altan Urag and Batzorig Vaanchig of
Asia's Got Talent, who cameoed as a singer. Daniele Luppi composed the main
theme, whilst Peter Nashel and Eric V. Hachikian are composers of the original
score.

The first season of Marco Polo was met with negative reviews from critics. On
Rotten Tomatoes, the first season holds a rating of 24%, based on 33 reviews,
with a rating average of 4.7/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "An
all-around disappointment, Marco Polo is less entertaining than a round of the
game that shares its name." On Metacritic, the show's first season has a score
of 48 out of 100 based on 21 reviews by critics, indicating "mixed reviews".

In his review for Entertainment Weekly, Jeff Jensen gave the first season a "B−"
rating, calling the premise "stale", but added "Somewhere in the middle of
episode 2, though, Marco Polo becomes surprisingly watchable. The filmmaking
becomes bolder." Writing for People, Tom Gliatto praised the series, calling it
"...a fun, body-flinging, old-fashioned epic". USA Today reviewer Robert Bianco
gave the series 1 1⁄2 stars out of 4, saying, "Clearly what Netflix hopes you'll
see a [sic] big-bucks, prestige entertainment along the lines of that HBO
fantasy epic, but in truth, Marco is far closer to one of those cheesy
international syndicated adventures."

On March 23, 2015, the President of Mongolia Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj presented
John Fusco and the Marco Polo creative team with an award, honoring their
positive portrayal and global presentation of Mongolian subject matter. Fusco,
himself, has described the series as historical fiction, based on the accounts
of the Venetian traveler Marco Polo.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Olivia_de_Havilland

Olivia Mary de Havilland (born July 1, 1916) is a British-American actress whose
career spanned from 1935 to 1990. She appeared in 49 feature films, and was one
of the leading movie stars during the golden age of Classical Hollywood. She is
best known for her early screen performances in The Adventures of Robin Hood
(1938) and Gone with the Wind (1939), and her later award-winning performances
in To Each His Own (1946), The Snake Pit (1948), and The Heiress (1949).

Born in Tokyo to British parents, de Havilland and her younger sister, actress
Joan Fontaine, moved to California in 1919. They were brought up by their mother
Lilian, a former stage actress who taught them dramatic art, music, and
elocution. De Havilland made her acting debut in amateur theatre in Alice in
Wonderland. Later, she appeared in a local production of Shakespeare's A
Midsummer Night's Dream, which led to her playing Hermia in Max Reinhardt's
stage production of the same play and a movie contract with Warner Bros.

Olivia de Havilland made her screen debut in Reinhardt's A Midsummer Night's
Dream in 1935. She began her career playing demure ingénues opposite popular
leading men, including Errol Flynn, with whom she made nine films. They became
one of Hollywood's most popular romantic on-screen pairings. She achieved her
initial popularity in romantic comedy films, such as The Great Garrick (1937),
and in Westerns, such as Dodge City (1939). Her natural beauty and refined
acting style made her particularly effective in historical period dramas, such
as Anthony Adverse (1936), and romantic dramas, such as Hold Back the Dawn
(1941). In her later career, she was most successful in drama films, such as
Light in the Piazza (1962), and unglamorous roles in psychological dramas
including Hush… Hush, Sweet Charlotte (1964).

As well as her film career, de Havilland continued her work in the theatre,
appearing three times on Broadway, in Romeo and Juliet (1951), Candida (1952),
and A Gift of Time (1962). She also worked in television, appearing in the
successful miniseries, Roots: The Next Generations (1979), and television
feature films, such as Anastasia: The Mystery of Anna, for which she received a
Primetime Emmy Award nomination. During her film career, de Havilland won two
Academy Awards, two Golden Globe Awards, two New York Film Critics Circle
Awards, the National Board of Review Award for Best Actress, and the Venice Film
Festival Volpi Cup. For her contributions to the motion picture industry, she
received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. For her lifetime contribution to
the arts, she received the National Medal of Arts from President George W. Bush,
and was appointed a Chevalier of the Légion d'honneur by French President
Nicolas Sarkozy.

After romantic relationships with Howard Hughes, James Stewart, and John Huston,
de Havilland married author Marcus Goodrich, with whom she had a son, Benjamin.
Following her divorce from Goodrich in 1953, she moved to Paris and married
Pierre Galante, an executive editor for the French journal Paris Match, with
whom she had a daughter, Gisèle. In 1962, she published Every Frenchman Has One,
an account of her life in France. De Havilland and Joan Fontaine are the only
siblings to have won Academy Awards in a lead acting category. A lifelong
rivalry between the two resulted in an estrangement that lasted over three
decades. She has lived in Paris since 1956, and celebrated her 100th birthday on
July 1, 2016.

De Havilland was born on July 1, 1916, in Tokyo, Japan, to English parents. Her
father, Walter Augustus de Havilland (August 31, 1872 – May 23, 1968), served as
an English professor at the Imperial University in Tokyo before becoming a
patent attorney. Her mother, Lilian Augusta de Havilland Fontaine (née Ruse;
June 11, 1886 – February 20, 1975), was educated at the Royal Academy of
Dramatic Art in London and became a stage actress. Lilian also sang with the
Master of the King's Music, Sir Walter Parratt, and toured England with the
composer Ralph Vaughan Williams. Olivia's paternal cousin was Sir Geoffrey
de Havilland (1882–1965), an aircraft designer and founder of the de Havilland
aircraft company. Lilian and Walter met in Japan in 1913 and were married the
following year. They moved into a large house in Tokyo, where Lilian gave
informal singing recitals for the European colony. The marriage was not a happy
one due in part to Walter's infidelities. Olivia's younger sister Joan‍—‌later
known as actress Joan Fontaine‍—‌was born on October 22, 1917. In February 1919,
Lilian persuaded her husband to take the family back to England to a climate
better suited for their ailing daughters. They sailed aboard the SS Siberia Maru
to San Francisco, where the family stopped to treat Olivia's tonsillitis.

After Joan developed pneumonia, Lilian decided to remain with her daughters in
California, where they eventually settled in the village of Saratoga, 50 miles
(80 km) south of San Francisco.[Note 1] Her father abandoned the family and
returned to his Japanese housekeeper, who eventually became his second wife.

Olivia was raised to appreciate the arts, beginning with ballet lessons at the
age of four, and piano lessons a year later. She learned to read before she was
six, and her mother, who occasionally taught dramatic art, music, and elocution,
had her reciting passages from Shakespeare to strengthen her diction.[Note 2]
During this period, her younger sister Joan first started calling her "Livvie",
a nickname that would last throughout her life. De Havilland entered Saratoga
Grammar School in 1922 and did well in her studies. She enjoyed reading, writing
poetry, and drawing, and once represented her grammar school in a county
spelling bee, coming in second place. In 1923, Lilian had a new Tudor-style
house built, where the family resided until the early 1930s.

In April 1925, after her divorce was finalized, Lilian married George Milan
Fontaine, a department store manager for O. A. Hale & Co. in San Jose. Fontaine
was a good provider and respectable businessman, but his strict parenting style
generated animosity and later rebellion in both of his new stepdaughters.[Note
3]

De Havilland continued her education at Los Gatos High School, near her home in
Saratoga. There, she excelled in oratory and field hockey and participated in
school plays and the school drama club, eventually becoming the club's
secretary. With plans of becoming a schoolteacher of English and speech, she
also attended Notre Dame Convent in Belmont. In 1933, de Havilland made her
debut in amateur theatre in Alice in Wonderland, a production of the Saratoga
Community Players based on the novel by Lewis Carroll. She also appeared in
several school plays, including The Merchant of Venice and Hansel and Gretel.
Her passion for drama eventually led to a confrontation with her stepfather, who
forbade her from participating in further extracurricular activities. When he
learned that she had won the lead role of Elizabeth Bennet in a school
fund-raising production of Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice, he gave her an
ultimatum to either stay home or not return home. Not wanting to let her school
and classmates down, she left home forever, moving in with a family friend.

After graduating from high school in 1934, de Havilland was offered a
scholarship to Mills College in Oakland to pursue her chosen career as an
English teacher. She was also offered the role of Puck in the Saratoga Community
Theater production of Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream. That summer,
Austrian director Max Reinhardt came to California for a major new production of
the same play to premiere at the Hollywood Bowl. After one of Reinhardt's
assistants saw her perform in Saratoga, he offered her the second understudy
position for the role of Hermia. One week before the premiere, the understudy
Jean Rouverol and lead actress Gloria Stuart both left the project, leaving
18-year-old de Havilland to play Hermia. Impressed with her performance,
Reinhardt offered her the part in the four-week autumn tour that followed.
During that tour, Reinhardt received word that he would direct the Warner Bros.
film version of his stage production, and he offered her the film role of
Hermia. With her mind still set on becoming a teacher, de Havilland initially
wavered, but eventually Reinhardt and executive producer Henry Blanke persuaded
her to sign a five-year contract with Warner Bros. on November 12, 1934, with a
starting salary of $200 a week.

De Havilland made her screen debut in Reinhardt's A Midsummer Night's Dream,
which was filmed at Warner Bros. studios from December 19, 1934, to March 9,
1935. During the production, de Havilland picked up film acting techniques from
the film's co-director William Dieterle, and camera techniques from
cinematographer Hal Mohr, who was impressed with her questions about his work.
By the end of filming, she had learned the effect of lighting and camera angles
on how she appeared on screen and how to find her best lighting. Following
premieres in New York and Beverly Hills, the film was released on October 30,
1935. Despite the publicity campaign, the film generated little enthusiasm with
audiences. While the critical response was mixed, de Havilland's performance was
praised by The San Francisco Examiner critic. In his review in the Brooklyn
Daily Eagle, Winston Burdett noted that she "acts graciously and does greater
justice to Shakespeare's language than anyone else in the cast". Two minor
comedies followed, Alibi Ike with Joe E. Brown and The Irish in Us with James
Cagney. In both films, she played the sweet and charming love interest‍—‌a role
into which she would later become typecast. After the experience of being a
Reinhardt player, de Havilland felt disappointed being assigned these routine
heroine roles. In March, de Havilland and her mother moved into an apartment at
the Chateau des Fleurs at 6626 Franklin Avenue in Hollywood.

In July 1935, Warner Bros. paired de Havilland with an unknown Australian actor
named Errol Flynn in the swashbuckler film Captain Blood (1935). According to
film historian Tony Thomas, both actors had "classic good looks, cultured
speaking voices, and a sense of distant aristocracy about them". Filmed between
August 5 and October 29, 1935, Captain Blood gave de Havilland the opportunity
to appear in her first costumed historical romance and adventure epic, a genre
to which she was well suited, given her beauty and elegance. In the film, she
played Arabella Bishop, the niece of a Jamaica plantation owner, who purchases
at auction an Irish physician wrongly condemned to servitude. The on-screen
chemistry between de Havilland and Flynn was evident from their first scenes
together, where clashes between her character's spirited hauteur and his
character's playful braggadocio did not mask their mutual attraction to each
other.[Note 4] Unlike her two previous roles, Arabella is a feisty young woman
who knows what she wants and is willing to fight for it. The bantering tone of
their exchanges in the film‍—‌the healthy give-and-take and mutual
respect‍—‌became the basis for their on-screen relationship in subsequent films.
Captain Blood was released on December 28, 1935, and received good reviews and
wide public appeal. De Havilland's performance was singled out in The New York
Times and Variety. The film was nominated for four Academy Awards, including
Best Picture. The popular success of the film, as well as the critical response
to the on-screen couple, led to seven additional collaborations.

In 1936, de Havilland appeared in Mervyn LeRoy's historical period drama Anthony
Adverse with Fredric March. Based on the popular novel by Hervey Allen, the film
follows the adventures of an orphan raised by a Scottish merchant, whose pursuit
of fortune separates him from the innocent peasant girl he loves, marries, and
eventually loses. De Havilland played the peasant girl Angela, who after being
separated from her slave-trader husband, becomes opera star Mademoiselle
Georges, the mistress of Napoleon. The film earned six Academy Award
nominations, including Best Picture. It garnered de Havilland good exposure and
the opportunity to portray a character as she develops over time. Howard Barnes
of the New York Herald Tribune found her later scenes as Mademoiselle Georges
"not very credible", but Frank S. Nugent of The New York Times called her "a
winsome Angela". That same year, she was reunited with Flynn in Michael Curtiz's
period action film The Charge of the Light Brigade, set during the Crimean War
which became a box office success. During the film's production, de Havilland
renegotiated her contract with Warner Bros. and signed a seven-year contract on
April 14, 1936, with a starting weekly salary of five hundred dollars
(equivalent to $8,600 in 2016).[Note 5] Toward the end of the year, 20-year-old
de Havilland and her mother moved to 2337 Nella Vista Avenue in the Los Feliz
section of Los Angeles.

In 1937, de Havilland had her first top billing in Archie Mayo's comedy Call It
a Day, about a middle-class English family struggling with the romantic effects
of spring fever during the course of a single day. De Havilland played daughter
Catherine Hilton, who falls in love with the handsome artist hired to paint her
portrait. The film did not do well at the box office and did little to advance
her career. She fared better in Mayo's screwball comedy It's Love I'm After with
Leslie Howard and Bette Davis. De Havilland played Marcia West, a young
debutante and theater fan enamored with a Barrymore-like matinee idol who
decides to help the girl's fiancé by pretending to be an abominable cad. The
film received good reviews, with Variety calling it "fresh, clever, excellently
directed and produced, and acted by an ensemble that clicks from start to
finish", and praising de Havilland.

That same year, de Havilland made two more period films, beginning with The
Great Garrick, a fictional romantic comedy about the 18th-century English
actor's encounter with jealous players from the Comédie-Française who plot to
embarrass him on his way to Paris. Wise to their prank, Garrick plays along with
the ruse, determined to get the last laugh, even on a lovely young aristocrat,
de Havilland's Germaine Dupont, whom he mistakenly believes to be one of the
players. With her refined demeanor and diction, de Havilland delivers a
performance that is "lighthearted and thoroughly believable", according to
Judith Kass. Variety praised the film, calling it "a production of superlative
workmanship".

Despite the positive reviews, the film did not do as well at the box
office.[Note 6] Her final film that year was Michael Curtiz's romantic drama
Gold Is Where You Find It, a film about the late 19th-century conflict in the
Sacramento Valley between gold miners and their hydraulic equipment and farmers
whose land is being flooded. De Havilland played the daughter of a farmer,
Serena Ferris, who falls in love with the mining engineer responsible for the
flooding. The film was released in February 1938, and was her first appearance
in three-strip Technicolor.

In September 1937, de Havilland was selected by Warner Bros. studio head Jack L.
Warner to play Maid Marian opposite Errol Flynn in The Adventures of Robin Hood
(1938). The Technicolor production was filmed on location between September 26,
1937, and January 14, 1938, at Bidwell Park, Busch Gardens, and Lake Sherwood in
California. Directed by William Keighley and Michael Curtiz, the film is about
the legendary Robin Hood, a Saxon knight who opposes the corrupt and brutal
Prince John and his Norman lords while good King Richard is away fighting in the
Third Crusade. The king's ward, Maid Marian, initially opposes Robin, but later
supports him after learning his true intentions of helping his oppressed people.
No mere bystander to events, Marian risks her life to save Robin by providing
his men a plan for his escape. As defined by de Havilland, Marian is both a
beautiful fairy-tale heroine and a spirited, intelligent woman "whose actions
are governed by her mind as well as her heart", according to author Judith Kass.
The Adventures of Robin Hood was released on May 14, 1938, and was an immediate
critical and commercial success, earning an Academy Award nomination for Best
Picture. It went on to become one of the most popular adventure films of the
Classical Hollywood era.

The popularity of The Adventures of Robin Hood brought de Havilland a new level
of fame as a movie star, but this new status was not reflected in her subsequent
film assignments at Warner Bros. Her next several roles were more routine and
less challenging. In the romantic comedy Four's a Crowd (1938), de Havilland
played Lorri Dillingwell, a dizzy rich girl being romanced by a conniving public
relations man looking to land an account with her eccentric grandfather. In Ray
Enright's romantic comedy Hard to Get (1938), she played another dizzy rich
girl, Margaret Richards, whose desire to exact revenge on a gas station
attendant leads to her own comeuppance. While de Havilland was certainly capable
of playing these kinds of characters, her personality was better suited to
stronger and more dramatic roles, according to Judith Kass. By this time,
de Havilland had serious doubts about her career at Warner Bros.

Some film scholars consider 1939 to be the high point of the golden age of
Classical Hollywood, producing classics in many genres, including the
Western.[Note 7] Warner Bros. produced Michael Curtiz's sprawling Technicolor
adventure Dodge City, Flynn and de Havilland's first Western film. Set during
the American Civil War, the film is about a Texas trailblazer who witnesses the
brutal lawlessness of Dodge City, Kansas, and becomes sheriff to clean up the
town. De Havilland played Abbie Irving, whose initial hostility towards Flynn's
character Wade Hatton is transformed by events, and the two fall in love‍—‌by
now a proven formula for their on-screen relationships. Curtiz's action
sequences, Sol Polito's cinematography, Max Steiner's expansive film score, and
perhaps the "definitive saloon brawl in movie history" all contributed to the
film's success. Variety described the film as "a lusty western, packed with
action". For de Havilland, playing yet one more supporting love interest in a
limited role, Dodge City represented the emotional low point of her career to
that point. She later said, "I was in such a depressed state that I could hardly
remember my lines."

In a letter to a colleague dated November 18, 1938, film producer David O.
Selznick wrote, "I would give anything if we had Olivia de Havilland under
contract to us so that we could cast her as Melanie." The film he was preparing
to shoot was Gone with the Wind, and Jack L. Warner was unwilling to lend her
out for the project. De Havilland had read the novel, and unlike most other
actresses, who wanted the Scarlett O'Hara role, she wanted to play Melanie
Hamilton‍—‌a character whose quiet dignity and inner strength she understood and
felt she could bring to life on the screen. De Havilland turned to Warner's wife
Anne for help. Warner later recalled, "Olivia, who had a brain like a computer
concealed behind those fawn-like eyes, simply went to my wife and they joined
forces to change my mind." Warner relented, and de Havilland was signed to the
project a few weeks before the start of principal photography on January 26,
1939.

Set in the American South during the 19th century, the film is about the
strong-willed daughter of a Georgia plantation owner in love with the husband of
her sister-in-law, Melanie, whose kindness stands in sharp contrast to those
around her. According to film historian Tony Thomas, de Havilland's skillful and
subtle performance effectively presents this character of selfless love and
quiet strength in a way that keeps her vital and interesting throughout the
film. Gone with the Wind had its world premiere in Atlanta, Georgia, on
December 15, 1939, and was well received. Frank S. Nugent of The Times wrote
that de Havilland's Melanie "is a gracious, dignified, tender gem of
characterization", and John C. Flinn, Sr., in Variety called her "a standout".
The film won 10 Academy Awards, including Best Picture, and de Havilland
received her first nomination for Best Supporting Actress.

Within days of completing her work in Gone with the Wind in June 1939,
de Havilland returned to Warner Bros. and began filming Michael Curtiz's
historical drama The Private Lives of Elizabeth and Essex with Bette Davis and
Errol Flynn. She had hoped her work on Selznick's prestige picture would lead to
first-rate roles at Warner Bros., but instead she received third billing below
the title as the queen's lady-in-waiting. In early September, she was lent out
to Samuel Goldwyn Productions for Sam Wood's romantic caper film Raffles with
David Niven, about a high-society cricketer and jewel thief. De Havilland later
complained, "I had nothing to do with that style of film." In early 1940,
de Havilland refused to appear in several films assigned to her, initiating the
first of her suspensions at the studio. She agreed to play in Curtis Bernhardt's
musical comedy drama My Love Came Back with Jeffrey Lynn and Eddie Albert, who
played a classical music student turned swing jazz bandleader. De Havilland
played violinist Amelia Cornell, whose life becomes complicated by the support
of a wealthy sponsor.[Note 8] In his review in The New York Times, Bosley
Crowther described the film as "a featherlight frolic, a rollicking roundelay of
deliciously pointed nonsense", noting that de Havilland "plays the part with
pace and wit".

That same year, de Havilland was reunited with Flynn in their sixth film
together, Michael Curtiz's Western adventure Santa Fe Trail, set against the
backdrop of abolitionist John Brown's fanatical antislavery attacks in the days
leading up to the American Civil War. The mostly fictional story follows West
Point cadets J. E. B. Stuart, played by Flynn, and George Armstrong Custer,
played by Ronald Reagan, as they make their way west, both vying for the
affection of de Havilland's Kit Carson Halliday. Unlike some of her previous
adventure film roles, Kit is a vital, interesting, and confident character who
knows her mind and plays a pivotal role in the story. Playing Kit in a
provocative, tongue-in-cheek manner, de Havilland creates a character of real
substance and dimension, according to Tony Thomas. Following a world premiere on
December 13, 1940, at the Lensic Theatre in Santa Fe, New Mexico‍—‌attended by
cast members, reporters, the governor, and over 60,000 fans‍—‌Santa Fe Trail
went on to become one of the top-grossing films of 1940. De Havilland, who
accompanied Flynn on the well-publicized train ride to Santa Fe, did not attend
the premiere, having been diagnosed with appendicitis that morning and rushed
into surgery.

Following her emergency surgery, de Havilland began a long period of
convalescence in a Los Angeles hospital during which time she rejected several
scripts offered to her by Warner Bros., leading to another suspension. In 1941,
she appeared in three commercially successful films, beginning with Raoul
Walsh's romantic comedy The Strawberry Blonde with James Cagney. Set during the
Gay Nineties, the story involves a man who marries an outspoken advocate for
women's rights after a rival steals his glamorous "strawberry blonde"
girlfriend, and later discovers he ended up with a loving and understanding
wife. Her performance revealed a growing confidence playing comedic roles, and a
real talent for combining the qualities of kindness and love with a refined
sense of naughtiness, according to film historian Tony Thomas. The film was a
critical and commercial success. In Mitchell Leisen's romantic drama Hold Back
the Dawn with Charles Boyer for Paramount Pictures, de Havilland transitioned to
a different type of role for her‍—‌an ordinary, decent small-town teacher whose
life and sexuality are awakened by a sophisticated European gigolo, whose own
life is positively affected by her love. Leisen's careful direction and guidance
appealed to de Havilland‍—‌much more than the workman-like approach of her
Warner Bros. directors. Bosley Crowther of The New York Times wrote, "Olivia
de Havilland plays the school teacher as a woman with romantic fancies whose
honesty and pride are her own‍—‌and the film's‍—‌chief support. Incidentally,
she is excellent." Her performance earned de Havilland her second Academy Award
nomination‍—‌this time for Best Actress.

In July 1941, de Havilland was reunited with Errol Flynn for their eighth movie
together, Raoul Walsh's epic They Died with Their Boots On. The film is loosely
based on the courtship and marriage of George Armstrong Custer and Elizabeth
"Libbie" Bacon. Flynn and de Havilland had a falling out the previous
year‍—‌mainly over the roles she was being given‍—‌and she did not intend to
work with him again. Even Flynn acknowledged, "She was sick to death of playing
'the girl' and badly wanted a few good roles to show herself and the world that
she was a fine actress." After she learned from Warner that Flynn had come to
his office saying he needed her in the film, de Havilland accepted. Screenwriter
Lenore Coffee was brought in to add several romantic scenes, and improve the
overall dialogue. The result is a film that includes some of their finest work
together. Their last appearance on screen is Custer's farewell to his wife.
"Errol was quite sensitive," de Havilland would later remember, "I think he knew
it would be the last time we worked together." Flynn's final line in that scene
would hold special meaning for her: "Walking through life with you, ma'am, has
been a very gracious thing." They Died with Their Boots On was released on
November 21, 1941, and while some reviewers criticized the film's historical
inaccuracies, most applauded the action sequences, cinematography, and acting.
Thomas M. Pryor of The New York Times found de Havilland "altogether
captivating". The film went on to earn $2,550,000 (equivalent to $41,500,000 in
2016), Warner Bros' second-biggest money-maker of that year.

In 1942, de Havilland appeared in Elliott Nugent's romantic comedy The Male
Animal with Henry Fonda, about an idealistic professor fighting for academic
freedom while trying to hold onto his job and his wife Ellen. While her role was
not particularly challenging, de Havilland's delineation of an intelligent,
good-natured woman trying to resolve the unsettling circumstances of her life
played a major part in the film's success, according to Tony Thomas. The film
was a critical and commercial success, with Bosley Crowther of The Times noting
that de Havilland "concocts a delightfully pliant and saucy character as the
wife". That year, she also appeared in John Huston's drama In This Our Life with
Bette Davis. Based on the Pulitzer Prize-winning novel of the same name by Ellen
Glasgow, the story is about two sisters whose lives are destroyed by the anger
and jealousy of one of the sisters. Crowther gave the film a negative review,
but noted de Havilland's "warm and easy performance". During production,
de Havilland and Huston began a romantic relationship that lasted three years.

According to de Havilland, one of the few truly satisfying roles she played for
Warner Bros. was the title character in Norman Krasna's romantic comedy Princess
O'Rourke (1943) with Robert Cummings. Filmed in July and August 1942, the story
is about a European princess in Washington, DC, visiting her diplomat uncle, who
is trying to find her an American husband. Intent on marrying a man of her own
choosing, she boards a plane heading west and ends up falling in love with an
American pilot, who is unaware of her true identity.[Note 9] The film was
released on October 23, 1943, and did well at the box office. Bosley Crowther
called it "a film which is in the best tradition of American screen comedy", and
found de Havilland's performance "charming".

After fulfilling her seven-year Warner Bros. contract in 1943, de Havilland was
informed that six months had been added to her contract for times she had been
on suspension. At the time, the studios had adopted the position that California
law allowed them to suspend contract players for rejecting a role, and the
period of suspension could be added to the contract period. Most contract
players accepted this, but a few tried to change the system, including Bette
Davis, who mounted an unsuccessful lawsuit against Warner Bros. in the 1930s. On
August 23, 1943, on the advice of her lawyer, Martin Gang, de Havilland took
Warner Bros. to court, citing an existing section of the California Labor Code
that forbade an employer from enforcing a contract against an employee for
longer than seven years from the date of first performance. In November 1943,
the California Superior Court found in de Havilland's favor, and Warner Bros.
immediately appealed. On December 8, 1944, the California Court of Appeal for
the Second District ruled in her favor.[Note 10] The decision was one of the
most significant and far-reaching legal rulings in Hollywood, reducing the power
of the studios and extending greater creative freedom to performers.
California's resulting "seven-year rule", also known as Labor Code Section 2855,
is still known today as the De Havilland Law. Her legal victory, which cost her
$13,000 (equivalent to $180,000 in 2016) in legal fees, won de Havilland the
respect and admiration of her peers, among them her own sister Joan Fontaine,
who later commented, "Hollywood owes Olivia a great deal." Warner Bros. reacted
to de Havilland's lawsuit by circulating a letter to other studios that had the
effect of a "virtual blacklisting". As a consequence, de Havilland did not work
at a film studio for nearly two years.

De Havilland became a naturalized citizen of the United States on November 28,
1941. During the war years, she actively sought out ways to express her
patriotism and contribute to the war effort. In May 1942, she joined the
Hollywood Victory Caravan, a three-week train tour of the country that raised
money through the sale of war bonds. Later that year she began attending events
at the Hollywood Canteen, meeting and dancing with the troops. In December 1943
de Havilland joined a USO tour that traveled throughout the United States,
Alaska, and the South Pacific, visiting wounded soldiers in military hospitals.
She earned the respect and admiration of the troops for visiting the isolated
islands and battlefronts in the Pacific. She survived flights in damaged
aircraft and a bout with viral pneumonia requiring several days' stay in one of
the island barrack hospitals.[Note 11] She later remembered, "I loved doing the
tours because it was a way I could serve my country and contribute to the war
effort."

After the California Court of Appeals ruling freed her from her Warner Bros.
contract, de Havilland signed a two-picture deal with Paramount Pictures. In
June 1945, she began filming Mitchell Leisen's drama To Each His Own, about an
unwed mother who gives up her child for adoption and then spends the rest of her
life trying to undo that decision. De Havilland insisted on bringing in Leisen
as director, trusting his eye for detail, his empathy for actors, and the way he
controlled sentiment in their previous collaboration, Hold Back the Dawn. The
role required de Havilland to age nearly 30 years over the course of the
film‍—‌from an innocent, small-town girl to a shrewd, ruthless businesswoman
devoted to her cosmetics company. While de Havilland never formally studied
acting, she did read Stanislavsky's autobiography My Life in Art and applied one
of his "methods" for this role. To help her define her character during the four
periods of the story, she used a different perfume for each period. She also
lowered the pitch of her voice incrementally in each period until it became a
mature woman's voice. Her performance earned her the Academy Award for Best
Actress in 1946‍—‌her first Oscar. According to film historian Tony Thomas, the
award represented a vindication of her long struggle with Warner Bros. and
confirmation of her abilities as an actress.

Her next two roles were challenging. In Robert Siodmak's psychological thriller
The Dark Mirror (1946), de Havilland played twin sisters Ruth and Terry
Collins‍—‌one loving and normal, the other psychotic. In addition to the
technical problems of showing her as two characters interacting with each other
on screen at the same time, de Havilland needed to portray two separate and
psychologically opposite people. While the film was not well received by
critics‍—‌Variety said the film "gets lost in a maze of psychological gadgets
and speculation"‍—‌de Havilland's performance was praised by Tony Thomas, who
called her final scene in the film "an almost frighteningly convincing piece of
acting". De Havilland later stated that playing the evil sister haunted her for
years. In his review in The Nation, James Agee wrote that "her playing is
thoughtful, quiet, detailed, and well sustained, and since it is founded, as
some more talented playing is not, in an unusually healthful-seeming and likable
temperament, it is an undivided pleasure to see." While appearing in a summer
stock production of What Every Woman Knows in Westport, Connecticut, her second
professional stage appearance, de Havilland began dating Marcus Goodrich, a Navy
veteran, journalist, and author of the 1941 novel Delilah. They were married on
August 26, 1946.

De Havilland was praised for her performance as Virginia Cunningham in Anatole
Litvak's drama The Snake Pit (1948), one of the first films to attempt a
realistic portrayal of mental illness and an important exposé of the harsh
conditions in state mental hospitals, according to film critic Philip French.
Based on a novel by Mary Jane Ward and produced by Darryl F. Zanuck, the film is
about a woman placed in a mental institution by her husband to help her recover
from a nervous breakdown. Virginia Cunningham was one of the most difficult of
all her film roles, requiring significant preparation both mentally and
physically‍—‌she deliberately lost weight to help create her gaunt appearance on
screen. She consulted regularly with psychiatrists hired as consultants for the
film, and visited Camarillo State Mental Hospital to research her role and
observe the patients. The extreme physical discomfort of the hydrotherapy and
simulated electric shock therapy scenes were especially challenging for the
slight 5-foot-3-inch (160 cm) actress. In her performance, she conveyed her
mental anguish by physically transforming her face with furrowed brow, wild
staring eyes, and grimacing mouth.

According to author Judith Kass, de Havilland delivered a performance both
"restrained and electric", portraying varied and extreme aspects of her
character‍—‌from a shy young woman to a tormented and disoriented woman. For her
performance in The Snake Pit, de Havilland received an Academy Award nomination
for Best Actress, the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress, and
the Venice Film Festival Volpi Cup. In 1949, de Havilland appeared in William
Wyler's period drama The Heiress (1949), the fourth in a string of critically
acclaimed performances. After seeing the play on Broadway, de Havilland called
Wyler and urged him to fly to New York to see what she felt would be a perfect
role for her. Wyler obliged, loved the play, and with de Havilland's help
arranged for Paramount to secure the film rights. Adapted for the screen by Ruth
and Augustus Goetz and based on the 1880 novel Washington Square by Henry James,
the film is about a young naïve woman who falls in love with a young man, over
the objections of her emotionally abusive father, who suspects the man of being
a gold digger. As she had done in Hold Back the Dawn, de Havilland portrays a
character's transformation from a shy, trusting innocent to a guarded, mature
woman over a period of years. Her delineation of Catherine Sloper is developed
through carefully crafted movements, gestures, and facial expressions that
convey a submissive and inhibited young woman. Her timid voice, nervous hands,
downcast eyes, and careful movements all communicate what the character is too
shy to verbalize. Throughout the production, Wyler pressed de Havilland hard to
elicit the requisite visual points of the character. In the scene where
Catherine returns home after being jilted, the director had the actress carry a
suitcase filled with heavy books up the stairs to convey the weight of
Catherine's trauma physically instead of using a planned speech in the original
script. The Heiress was released in October 1949 and was well received by
critics. For her performance, de Havilland received the New York Film Critics
Award, the Golden Globe Award, and the Academy Award for Best Actress‍—‌her
second Oscar.

After giving birth to her first child, Benjamin, on September 27, 1949,
de Havilland took time off from making films to be with her infant. She turned
down the role of Blanche DuBois in A Streetcar Named Desire, later explaining
that becoming a mother was a "transforming experience" and that she could not
relate to the character. In 1950, her family moved to New York City, where she
began rehearsals for a major new stage production of Shakespeare's Romeo and
Juliet; it was her lifelong ambition to play Juliet on the stage. The play
opened at the Broadhurst Theatre on March 11, 1951, to mixed reviews, with some
critics believing the 35-year-old actress was too old for the role. The play
closed after 45 performances. Undaunted, de Havilland accepted the title role in
the stage production of George Bernard Shaw's comedy Candida, which opened at
the National Theatre on Broadway in April 1952. While reviews of the play were
mixed, de Havilland's performance was well received, and following the scheduled
32 performances, she went on tour with the company and delivered 323 additional
performances, many to sold-out audiences. While de Havilland achieved major
accomplishments during this period of her career, her marriage to Goodrich, 18
years her senior, had grown strained due to his unstable temperament. In August
1952, de Havilland filed for divorce, which became final the following year.

In April 1953, at the invitation of the French government, de Havilland traveled
to the Cannes Film Festival, where she met Pierre Galante, an executive editor
for the French journal Paris Match. Following a long-distance courtship and the
requisite nine-month residency requirement, de Havilland and Galante married on
April 2, 1955, in the village of Yvoy-le-Marron, and settled together in a
three-story house near Bois de Boulogne park in the Rive Droite section of
Paris. That same year, de Havilland returned to the screen in Terence Young's
period drama That Lady (1955), about a Spanish princess and her unrequited love
for King Philip II of Spain, whose respect she earned in her youth after losing
an eye in a sword fight defending his honor. According to Tony Thomas, the film
uses authentic Spanish locations effectively, but suffers from a convoluted plot
and excessive dialogue, and while de Havilland delivered a warm and elegant
performance as Ana de Mendoza, the film was disappointing. Following her
appearances in the romantic melodrama Not as a Stranger (1955) and The
Ambassador's Daughter (1956)‍—‌neither of which were successful at the box
office‍—‌de Havilland gave birth to her second child, Gisèle Galante, on
July 18, 1956.

De Havilland returned to the screen in 1958 in Michael Curtiz's Western drama
The Proud Rebel, a film about a former Confederate soldier whose wife was killed
in the war and whose son lost the ability to speak after witnessing the tragedy.
De Havilland played Linnett Moore, a tough yet feminine frontier woman who cares
for the boy and comes to love his father. The movie was filmed on location in
Utah, where de Havilland learned to hitch and drive a team of horses and handle
a gun for her role. The Proud Rebel was released May 28, 1958, and was well
received by audiences and critics. In his review for The New York Times, A. H.
Weiler called the film a "truly sensitive effort" and "heartwarming drama", and
praised de Havilland's ability to convey the "warmth, affection and sturdiness
needed in the role".

One of de Havilland's most noted performances during this period was in Guy
Green's romantic drama Light in the Piazza (1962) with Rossano Brazzi. Filmed in
Florence and Rome, and based on Elizabeth Spencer's novel of the same name, the
film is about a middle-class American tourist on extended vacation in Italy with
her beautiful 26-year-old daughter, who is mentally disabled as a result of a
childhood accident. Faced with the prospect of her daughter falling in love with
a young Italian, the mother struggles with conflicting emotions about her
daughter's future. De Havilland projects a calm maternal serenity throughout
most of the film, only showing glimpses of the worried mother anxious for her
child's happiness. The film was released on February 9, 1962, and was well
received, with a Hollywood Reporter reviewer calling it "an uncommon love story
... told with rare delicacy and force", and Variety noting that the film
"achieves the rare and delicate balance of artistic beauty, romantic substance,
dramatic novelty and commercial appeal". Variety singled out de Havilland’s
performance as "one of great consistency and subtle projection".

In early 1962, de Havilland traveled to New York and began rehearsals for Garson
Kanin's stage play A Gift of Time. Adapted from the autobiographical book Death
of a Man by Lael Tucker Wertenbaker, the play explores the emotionally painful
struggle of a housewife forced to deal with the slow death of her husband,
played by Henry Fonda. The play opened at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre on
Broadway to positive notices, with de Havilland receiving her best reviews as a
stage actress. Theater critic Walter Kerr praised her final scene, writing, "As
darkness gathers, the actress gains in stature, taking on the simple and
resolute willingness to understand." The New York World Telegram and Sun
reviewer concluded, "It is Miss de Havilland who gives the play its unbroken
continuity. This distinguished actress reveals Lael as a special and admirable
woman." She stayed with the production for 90 performances. The year 1962 also
had the publication of de Havilland's first book, Every Frenchman Has One, a
lighthearted account of her often amusing attempts to understand and adapt to
French life, manners, and customs. The book sold out its first printing prior to
the publication date and went on to become a bestseller.

In 1964, de Havilland appeared in her last two leading roles in feature
films‍—‌both psychological thrillers. In Walter Grauman's Lady in a Cage, she
played a wealthy poet who gets trapped in her mansion's elevator and faces the
threat of three terrorizing hooligans in her own home. Critics responded
negatively to the graphic violence and cruelty shown on screen. A. H. Weiler of
The New York Times called it a "sordid, if suspenseful, exercise in aimless
brutality". That same year, de Havilland appeared in Robert Aldrich's Hush…
Hush, Sweet Charlotte with her close friend Bette Davis. After Joan Crawford
left the picture due to illness, Davis had Aldrich fly to Switzerland to
persuade a reluctant de Havilland to accept the role of Miriam Deering, a cruel,
conniving character hidden behind the charming façade of a polite and cultured
lady. De Havilland's quiet, restrained performance provided a counterbalance to
Davis's ranting characterization. Film historian Tony Thomas described her
performance as "a subtle piece of acting" that was "a vital contribution to the
effectiveness of the film". The film was well received and earned seven Academy
Award nominations.

As film roles became more difficult to find, a common problem shared by many
Hollywood veterans from her era, de Havilland began working in television
dramas, despite her dislike of the networks' practice of breaking up story lines
with commercials. Her first venture into the medium was a teleplay directed by
Sam Peckinpah called Noon Wine (1966) on ABC Stage 67, a dark tragedy about a
farmer's act of murder that leads to his suicide. The production and her
performance as the farmer's wife Ellie were well received. In 1972, she starred
in her first television feature film, The Screaming Woman, about a wealthy woman
recovering from a nervous breakdown. In 1979, she appeared in the ABC miniseries
Roots: The Next Generations in the role of Mrs. Warner, the wife of a former
Confederate officer played by Henry Fonda. The miniseries was seen by an
estimated 110 million people‍—‌nearly one-third of American homes with
television sets. Throughout the 1970s, de Havilland's film work was limited to
smaller supporting roles and cameo appearances. Her last feature film was The
Fifth Musketeer (1979).

During this period, de Havilland began doing speaking engagements in cities
across the United States with a talk entitled "From the City of the Stars to the
City of Light", a program of personal reminiscences about her life and career.
She also attended tributes to Gone with the Wind. In the 1980s, her television
work included an Agatha Christie television film Murder Is Easy (1982), the
television drama The Royal Romance of Charles and Diana (1982) in which she
played the Queen Mother, and the 1986 ABC miniseries North and South, Book II.
Her most notable performance of the decade was in the television film Anastasia:
The Mystery of Anna (1986) as Dowager Empress Maria, which earned her a Golden
Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress in a Series, Miniseries or Television
Film. In 1988, de Havilland appeared in the HTV romantic television drama The
Woman He Loved; it was her final screen performance.

In retirement, de Havilland remained active in the film community. In 1998, she
traveled to New York to help promote a special showing of Gone with the Wind. In
2003, she appeared as a presenter at the 75th Academy Awards. In 2004, Turner
Classic Movies produced a retrospective piece called Melanie Remembers in which
she was interviewed for the 65th anniversary of the original release of Gone
with the Wind. In June 2006, she made appearances at tributes commemorating her
90th birthday at the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences and the Los
Angeles County Museum of Art.

On November 17, 2008, at the age of 92, de Havilland received the National Medal
of Arts, the highest honor conferred to an individual artist on behalf of the
people of the United States. The medal was presented to her by President George
W. Bush, who commended her "for her persuasive and compelling skill as an
actress in roles from Shakespeare's Hermia to Margaret Mitchell's Melanie. Her
independence, integrity, and grace won creative freedom for herself and her
fellow film actors." The following year, de Havilland narrated the documentary I
Remember Better When I Paint (2009), a film about the importance of art in the
treatment of Alzheimer's disease.

On September 9, 2010, de Havilland was appointed a Chevalier (knight) of the
Légion d'honneur, the highest decoration in France, awarded by French President
Nicolas Sarkozy, who told the actress, "You honor France for having chosen us."
In February the following year, she appeared at the César Awards in France,
where she was greeted with a standing ovation.[Note 12] De Havilland celebrated
her 100th birthday on July 1, 2016.

Although known as one of Hollywood's most exciting on-screen couples,
de Havilland and Errol Flynn were never involved in a romantic relationship.
Upon first meeting her at Warner Bros. in August 1935, Flynn was drawn to the
19-year-old actress with "warm brown eyes" and "extraordinary charm". In turn,
de Havilland fell in love with him,[Note 13] but kept her feelings inside, later
recalling, "He never guessed I had a crush on him ... it never occurred to me
that he was smitten with me, too." Flynn later wrote, "By the time we made The
Charge of the Light Brigade, I was sure that I was in love with her." Flynn
finally professed his love on March 12, 1937, at the Coronation Ball for King
George VI at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles, where they slow danced
together to "Sweet Leilani" at the hotel's Coconut Grove nightclub. "I was
deeply affected by him," she later remembered, "It was impossible for me not to
be." The evening ended on a sobering note, however, with de Havilland insisting
that despite his separation from his wife Lili Damita, he needed to divorce her
before their relationship could proceed. Flynn reunited with his wife later that
year, and de Havilland never acted on her feelings for Flynn.[Note 14]

In July 1938, de Havilland began dating business tycoon, aviator, and filmmaker
Howard Hughes, who had just completed his record-setting flight around the world
in 91 hours. In addition to escorting her about town, he gave the actress her
first flying lessons. She later said, "He was a rather shy man ... and yet, in a
whole community where the men every day played heroes on the screen and didn't
do anything heroic in life, here was this man who was a real hero." In December
1939, de Havilland began a romantic relationship with actor James Stewart. At
the request of Irene Mayer Selznick, the actor's agent asked Stewart to escort
de Havilland to the New York premiere of Gone with the Wind at the Astor Theater
on December 19, 1939. Over the next few days, Stewart took her to the theater
several times and to the 21 Club. They continued to see each other back in Los
Angeles, where Stewart provided occasional flying lessons and romance. According
to de Havilland, Stewart proposed marriage to her in 1940, but she felt that he
was not ready to settle down. Their relationship ended in late 1941 when
de Havilland began a romantic relationship with film director John Huston while
making In This Our Life. "John was a very great love of mine", she would later
admit, "He was a man I wanted to marry."[Note 15]

On August 26, 1946, she married Marcus Goodrich, a Navy veteran, journalist, and
author of the 1941 novel Delilah. The marriage ended in divorce in 1953. They
had one child, Benjamin Goodrich, who was born on September 27, 1949. He was
diagnosed with Hodgkin's lymphoma at the age of 19, but was able to graduate
from the University of Texas. He worked as a statistical analyst for Lockheed
Missiles and Space Company in Sunnyvale, California, and as an international
banking representative for the Texas Commerce Bank in Houston. He died on
October 1, 1991, in Paris at the age of 41 of heart disease brought on by
treatments for Hodgkin's disease, three weeks before the death of his father.

On April 2, 1955, de Havilland married Pierre Galante, an executive editor for
the French journal Paris Match. Her marriage to Galante prompted de Havilland to
move to Paris. The couple separated in 1962, but continued to live in the same
house for another six years to raise their children together. Galante moved
across the street and the two remained close, even after the finalization of the
divorce in 1979. She looked after him during his final bout with lung cancer
prior to his death in 1998. They had one child, Gisèle Galante, who was born on
July 18, 1956. After studying law at the Université de Droit de Nanterre School
of Law, she worked as a journalist in France and the United States. Since 1956,
de Havilland has lived in the same three-story house near Bois de Boulogne park
in the Rive Droite section of Paris.

De Havilland was raised in the Episcopal Church and has remained an Episcopalian
throughout her life.[Note 16] After moving to France, she became one of the
first women lectors at the American Cathedral in Paris, where she was on the
regular rota for Scripture readings. As recently as 2012, she was still doing
readings on major feast days, including Christmas and Easter. "It's a task I
love," she once said. In describing her preparation for her readings,
de Havilland once observed, "You have to convey the deep meaning, you see, and
it has to start with your own faith. But first I always pray. I pray before I
start to prepare, as well. In fact, I would always say a prayer before shooting
a scene, so this is not so different, in a way." De Havilland prefers to use the
Revised English Bible for its poetic style. She raised her son Benjamin in the
Episcopal Church and her daughter Gisèle in the Roman Catholic Church, the faith
of the child's father.

As a United States citizen, de Havilland became involved in politics as a way of
exercising her civic responsibilities. She campaigned for Franklin D.
Roosevelt's re-election in 1944. After the war, she joined the Independent
Citizens' Committee of the Arts, Sciences and Professions, a national public
policy advocacy group that included Bette Davis, Gregory Peck, and Humphrey
Bogart in its Hollywood chapter. In June 1946, she was asked to deliver speeches
for the committee that reflected the Communist Party line‍—‌the group was later
identified as a Communist front organization. Disturbed at seeing a small group
of Communist members manipulating the committee, de Havilland removed the
pro-Communist material from her speeches and rewrote them to reflect Harry S.
Truman's anti-Communist platform. She later recalled, "I realized a nucleus of
people was controlling the organization without a majority of the members of the
board being aware of it. And I knew they had to be Communists."

She organized a fight to regain control of the committee from its pro-Soviet
leadership, but her reform efforts failed. Her resignation from the committee
triggered a wave of resignations from 11 other Hollywood figures, including
future President Ronald Reagan.[Note 17] In 1958, she was secretly called before
the House Un-American Activities Committee and recounted her experiences with
the Independent Citizens' Committee.

De Havilland and her sister Joan Fontaine are the only siblings to have won
Academy Awards in a lead acting category. According to biographer Charles
Higham, the sisters always had an uneasy relationship, starting in early
childhood when Olivia had trouble accepting the idea of having a younger sister,
and Joan resenting her mother's favoritism for her older sister. This tension
was made worse by Fontaine's frequent childhood illnesses, which led to her
mother's overly protective expression, "Livvie can, Joan can't." Of the two
sisters, de Havilland was the first to become an actress, and for several years
Fontaine was overshadowed by her accomplishments. When Mervyn LeRoy offered
Fontaine a personal contract, her mother told her that Warner Bros. was
"Olivia's studio" and that she could not use the name "de Havilland". In 1942,
de Havilland and Fontaine were both nominated for an Academy Award for Best
Actress‍—‌de Havilland for Hold Back the Dawn and Fontaine for Suspicion. When
Fontaine's name was announced as winner, de Havilland reacted graciously saying,
"We've got it!" According to biographer Charles Higham, Fontaine rejected
de Havilland's attempts to congratulate her, and de Havilland was offended and
embarrassed.

Their relationship was further strained in 1946 when Fontaine made negative
comments to an interviewer about de Havilland's new husband. When she read her
sister's remarks, de Havilland was deeply hurt and waited for an apology that
was never offered. The following year after accepting her first Academy Award
for To Each His Own, de Havilland was approached backstage by Fontaine, who
wanted to congratulate her; de Havilland turned away from her sister. They did
not speak to each other for the next five years,[Note 18] and their silence may
have caused the estrangement between Fontaine and her own daughters, who
secretly maintained a relationship with de Havilland. Following her divorce from
Goodrich, de Havilland resumed contact with her sister, coming to her apartment
in New York and spending Christmas together there in 1961. The final break
between the sisters occurred in 1975 from a disagreement over their mother's
cancer treatment‍—‌de Havilland wanted to consult other doctors and supported
exploratory surgery; Fontaine disagreed. Fontaine also claimed that de Havilland
did not notify her of their mother's death while she was touring with a
play‍—‌de Havilland in fact had sent a telegram, which took two weeks to reach
her sister. The sibling feud ended with Fontaine's death on December 15,
2013.[Note 19] The following day, de Havilland released a statement saying she
was "shocked and saddened" by the news.

De Havilland's career spanned 53 years, from 1935 to 1988. During that time, she
appeared in 49 feature films, and was one of the leading movie stars during the
golden age of Classical Hollywood. She began her career playing demure ingénues
opposite popular male stars, including Errol Flynn, with whom she made her
breakout film Captain Blood in 1935. They would go on to make Eight more feature
films together, and became one of Hollywood's most popular romantic on-screen
pairings. Her range of performances included roles in most major movie genres.
Following her film debut in the Shakespeare adaptation A Midsummer Night's
Dream, de Havilland achieved her initial popularity in romantic comedies, such
as The Great Garrick and Hard to Get, and Western adventure films, such as Dodge
City and Santa Fe Trail. In her later career, she was most successful in drama
films, such as In This Our Life and Light in the Piazza, and psychological
dramas playing unglamorous characters in films such as The Dark Mirror, The
Snake Pit, and Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte.

During her career, de Havilland won two Academy Awards (To Each His Own and The
Heiress), two Golden Globe Awards (The Heiress and Anastasia: The Mystery of
Anna), two New York Film Critics Circle Awards (The Snake Pit and The Heiress),
the National Board of Review Award, and the Venice Film Festival Volpi Cup (The
Snake Pit), and a Primetime Emmy Award nomination (Anastasia: The Mystery of
Anna).

For her contributions to the motion picture industry, de Havilland received a
star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6762 Hollywood Boulevard on February 8,
1960. Since her retirement in 1988, her lifetime contribution to the arts has
been honored on two continents. In 1998, she received an honorary doctorate from
the University of Hertfordshire in England.

In 2006, she was inducted into the Online Film & Television Association Award
Film Hall of Fame. On November 17, 2008, President George W. Bush presented
de Havilland the National Medal of Arts, the highest honor given for achievement
in the arts conferred to an individual artist on behalf of the American people.
On September 9, 2010, de Havilland was appointed a Chevalier (knight) of the
Légion d'honneur, the highest decoration in France, awarded by French President
Nicolas Sarkozy.

The moving-image collection of Olivia de Havilland is held at the Academy Film
Archive, which preserved a nitrate reel of a screen test for Danton, Max
Reinhardt’s never-produced follow-up to A Midsummer Night’s Dream (1935).



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andrea_Leadsom

Andrea Jacqueline Leadsom PC MP (pronounced /ˈlɛdsəm/; née Salmon; born 13 May
1963) is a British Conservative Party politician who was appointed Secretary of
State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs on 14 July 2016. She previously
served as Minister of State for Energy at the Department of Energy and Climate
Change since May 2015, having held the posts of Economic Secretary to the
Treasury and City Minister from April 2014. She has been a Member of Parliament
representing South Northamptonshire since 2010.

After graduating with a degree in political science at the University of
Warwick, she worked in junior roles, including as a personal assistant, at
Barclays and Invesco Perpetual. Leadsom was first elected to the House of
Commons in the constituency South Northamptonshire in the 2010 general election.

Leadsom was a prominent member of the Leave campaign during the 2016 EU
referendum and gained standing in referendum TV debates. On David Cameron's
resignation, Leadsom became one of five candidates in the election for the
leadership of the governing Conservative Party, and thereby for the prime
ministership. In the second round of voting by MPs she came second to Theresa
May, and the two women would have proceeded to a ballot of party members, but
Leadsom withdrew from the contest before this could happen, stating that she did
not have enough support to win, and endorsed May, who became party leader and
Prime Minister. Leadsom had been criticised for suggesting that May was
unsuitable to be Prime Minister as she had no children; there were also
questions raised in the media about the accuracy of Leadsom's CV. May appointed
Leadsom as Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs in her
first cabinet.

Leadsom was born in Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, the daughter of Richard and Judy
Salmon (née. Kitchin). She attended Tonbridge Girls' Grammar School, then read
Political Science at the University of Warwick, graduating with a 2:2 in 1987.

After graduation, Leadsom began a career in the financial sector as a debt
trader for Barclays de Zoete Wedd, then the investment bank division of Barclays
Bank. For Barclays itself, she served as Deputy Director in the Financial
Institutions team from 1993; this involved the maintenance of contractual
relationships with other banks. In this role, she said she was given a "ringside
seat" in the collapse of Barings Bank. Leadsom clashed with the then-head of
Barclay Investments, Bob Diamond, who tried to persuade her to return to
full-time work soon after a pregnancy, and she left the company in 1997. Later
she would claim to have been a Director at Barclays, though in July 2016 she
submitted a revised CV which showed that she had only served as Deputy Director.

From 1997 to 1999, Leadsom served as director of her brother-in-law's hedge
fund, De Putron Fund Management (DPFM). Peter de Putron is her sister's husband.
According to records at Companies House, Leadsom was promoted to board director
for Marketing in 1998 under her maiden name.

Leadsom was Head of Corporate Governance and a Senior Investment Officer at
Invesco Perpetual from 1999 to 2009. According to a former colleague who
admitted to not knowing her personally, "the problem about these
claims[clarification needed] is that they risk misleading people into believing
that she has finance management skills and experience which qualify her for
senior posts in government"; her actual job was to work (sometimes part-time) on
“special projects”, mostly for the Chief Investment Officer, which included
negotiating pay terms for senior fund managers – towards the end of her time,
she advised on a number of governance issues, but she had no-one reporting to
her in either role. Approval for individuals to manage funds or deal with
clients is needed from the financial services regulator (then the Financial
Services Authority), which Leadsom held[clarification needed] from December 2002
to February 2003.

Leadsom herself has never made claims to have personally managed finance, and
Bob Yerbury, former Chief Investment Officer at Invesco Perpetual and Leadsom's
former manager, dismissed the controversy about how she described her time there
and described her as "totally honest".

Leadsom was a Councillor on South Oxfordshire District Council between 2003 and
2007.

She contested Knowsley South constituency in the 2005 general election and was
on the Conservative A-List.

Leadsom was selected to stand as the parliamentary candidate in the newly
created South Northamptonshire constituency in June 2006. In 2009,
ConservativeHome said that she was "defending a notional Conservative majority
of 11,356."

At the 2010 general election in May, Leadsom was elected with a majority of more
than 20,000. On entering the House of Commons she was appointed a member of the
Treasury Select Committee. She made her maiden speech on 22 June 2010 during the
budget debate, when she spoke of restoring health to the financial sector,
drawing from personal experience in financial regulation, particularly with
Barings Bank.

Leadsom campaigned for EU reform. In September 2011, she co-founded the Fresh
Start Project with Conservative MPs Chris Heaton-Harris and George Eustice to
"research and build support for realistic and far-reaching proposals for
reforming the EU". On 25 October 2011, Leadsom was one of 81 Conservative MPs to
defy the party whip and vote in favour of holding a referendum on the UK's
membership of the European Union. This led to a sharp ruction with George
Osborne at the time.

In July 2012, during the Libor scandal, she was widely reported on for her
contribution to the Treasury Select Committee's questioning of Bob Diamond. At a
subsequent hearing she questioned Paul Tucker, who stated that the previous
government had not conspired with the Bank to fix rates. In a BBC interview,
Leadsom stated that the suggestion "has now been completely squashed by Paul
Tucker", and that on that specific point, George Osborne, the Chancellor of the
Exchequer, might want to apologise to Ed Balls for "suggesting he was implicated
in rate fixing", although she also pointed out that Balls "still [had] a huge
amount to answer for in relation to the scandal and his time in office". Mike
Smithson suggested this could be a reason for Osborne to overlook her for a
promotion in the 2012 cabinet reshuffle, despite the fact that "in terms of
talent she must be right at the top of the list of 2010 newbies who should be
promoted." In 2012, Leadsom was ranked 91 on Iain Dale's list of top 100 most
influential figures from the right.

Leadsom was one of five MPs to abstain from the Government's Marriage (Same Sex
Couples) Bill by voting in both lobbies. Leadsom had earlier said she found the
wording of the legislation "unacceptable", and that voting no reflected the
views of "so many" of her constituents, who felt that the bill was "deeply
wrong", but ultimately chose to abstain, saying:

During her Conservative Party leadership campaign in 2016, she stated she would
have preferred a situation in which there were two types of services: "civil
partnerships to be available to heterosexual and gay couples and for marriage to
have remained a Christian service for men and women who wanted to commit in the
eyes of God."

In October 2013, Leadsom was appointed by David Cameron to the Number 10 Policy
Unit, with responsibility for part of the public services brief.

On 9 April 2014 Leadsom was appointed Economic Secretary to the Treasury
following Maria Miller's resignation from the Cabinet. She was also given the
additional responsibility of City Minister, a post which had previously been
held concurrently with the position of Financial Secretary to the Treasury.
According to the Financial Times, her period as City Minister was seen by
departmental officials as "a disaster", "the worst minister we ever had. … She
found it difficult to understand issues or take decisions. She was monomaniacal,
seeing the EU as the source of every problem. She alienated officials by
continually complaining about poor drafting."

In about 1997, she formed the company Bandal with her husband, and bought
property in Oxford and Surrey. The company was financed by loans from the Jersey
arm of Kleinwort Benson, a private bank. It was learned in 2014 that Leadsom had
transferred her shares to a trust fund for her children. A spokesman for Leadsom
said: "This is a normal corporate situation and all tax that is due is being
paid. None of the loans for the properties are based offshore".

There was further criticism in 2014 when The Independent revealed that she had
received a series of donations totalling £70,000 from a firm based in London but
owned by her Guernsey-based brother-in-law, Peter de Putron, via a holding
company in the British Virgin Islands tax haven. Leadsom's husband Ben is a
director of the firm which made the donations, which were used to pay the
salaries of staff in Leadsom's Westminster office after her election as MP; the
firm has also made donations of £816,000 to the Conservative party. Because the
firm making the donations, Gloucester Research (later becoming GR Software and
Research), was based in London, the donations conformed to the rule banning
political donations from abroad. The Labour MP Tom Watson said: “These very
large donations might be within the rules, but it certainly isn’t right that a
Treasury minister has been taking money in this way. Most reasonable people will
see this as completely unreasonable”.

Leadsom was re-elected as MP for South Northamptonshire on 7 May 2015 with
36,607 votes, compared to her nearest rival Lucy Mills (Labour), with 10,191
votes. On 11 May 2015, Leadsom, who had previously opposed wind farms and
European renewable energy targets, was moved from Economic Secretary to the
Treasury, to be appointed Minister of State at the Department of Energy and
Climate Change, reporting to Amber Rudd who was promoted to Secretary of State
at the same department.

Leadsom said in 2016 that she was "absolutely pro-choice" on abortion, but was
"keeping an eye on scientific progress which makes foetuses viable earlier". She
is concerned about child development, and founded a charity which helps
vulnerable mothers to bond with their babies. In the 2016 US Presidential
election she supported Democratic Party candidate Clinton against Republican
Trump. When seeking the Prime Ministership she said she "absolutely would rule
out giving Nigel Farage [of UKIP] a job".

She said that if she became Prime Minister she would go about repealing the ban
on fox hunting, suggesting that this would improve animal welfare. This is
despite record-high opposition, even among Conservative voters.

Before becoming Minister at the Department of Energy and Climate Change, Leadsom
had opposed wind farms and EU renewable energy targets. After her appointment
she said "When I first came to this job one of my two questions was: 'Is climate
change real?' and the other was 'Is hydraulic fracturing ["fracking"] safe?' And
on both of those questions I am now completely persuaded."

In April 2013 at the Hansard Society's annual parliamentary affairs lecture,
Leadsom warned against the UK leaving the European Union, stating that "I think
it would be a disaster for our economy and it would lead to a decade of economic
and political uncertainty at a time when the tectonic plates of global success
are moving."

However, in 2016 Leadsom campaigned for leave in the UK referendum on European
Union membership. The Mail on Sunday reproduced her earlier comments in its
issue of 3 July 2016. After her comments were read out by Andrew Marr on his
Sunday morning BBC programme, she explained to Marr how she reached her more
recent position: "It has been a journey. When I came into Parliament, like most
people in the country I'd grown up as part of the EU and it's absolutely part of
our DNA and I came into Parliament, set up something called the Fresh Start
Project, which took hundreds and hundreds of hours of evidence about how the EU
impacts on the UK – on everything from immigration to fisheries and so on...
During that process I travelled all across Europe with lots of parliamentary
colleagues – up to 100 Conservative colleagues supporting this work – to try and
get a really decent, fundamental reform of the EU." A spokesman for Leadsom said
that the recording was "taken completely out of context" because she had opened
the lecture by saying that the EU needed major reforms in order for it to be
"sustainable". She added that the democratic consent for the EU in Britain was
"wafer thin".

Leadsom took a prominent role in the campaign to leave the EU in the June 2016
referendum campaign. She argued that the Governor of the Bank of England, Mark
Carney, had destabilised financial markets and jeopardised the Bank's
independence by warning of short-term negative effects on the economy caused by
leaving the EU.

In a televised debate on the EU referendum, Leadsom appeared on the "Leave"
panel, along with Gisela Stuart and Boris Johnson. She disputed claims that the
UK should pursue single market membership, saying that 80% of the world's
economy, and most EU free-trade deals, are not within the single market. She
also said that the UK economy is too large to need the single market, but is
hindered by the slowness of EU trade procedures.

Immediately following the referendum vote on 23 June 2016 for Britain to leave
the EU, David Cameron announced that he would resign as Prime Minister by
October. Leadsom was one of the early favourites to become the next Prime
Minister, and was also linked with a possible role as Chancellor. On 30 June
2016 she announced her candidacy to become leader of the Conservative Party.
Leadsom said she would trigger Article 50 immediately upon becoming Prime
Minister, and conduct swift negotiations with the European Union.

In the first round of voting on 5 July 2016, Theresa May received support from
165 MPs, while Leadsom came second with 66 votes. In the second ballot, Leadsom
came second with 84 votes. Michael Gove was eliminated with 46 votes. Theresa
May received 199 votes. On 11 July 2016, Leadsom announced she would be
withdrawing her leadership bid, leaving Theresa May as the successor to David
Cameron.

In a BBC interview on 7 July 2016, Leadsom spoke of her disappointment about
plotting in the leadership race, including alleged attempts by opponents to
block her from the final ballot. She dismissed "ridiculous" accusations that her
biography was misleading, saying that her "incredibly varied" CV is "all
absolutely true".

Leadsom promised to "banish the pessimists" and to provide prosperity for the UK
if elected, and stated that she was committed to fair trade. She also stated
that she would reintroduce fox hunting if elected, and expressed doubts over the
introduction of gay marriage, both causes popular with Conservative right
wingers. She also criticised her rival Theresa May's plan to use the status of
EU nationals living in the UK as "bargaining chips", promising that if she was
elected they could stay

On 6 July 2016 The Times and other news media published articles which said that
Leadsom had overstated her private sector experience and responsibilities. They
said that despite references her supporters had made to her managing "billions
of pounds in funds" and her impressive-sounding job titles, she had held
financial services regulator approval for only a brief three month period in 10
years at Invesco Perpetual, and quoted former colleagues who said that she had
exaggerated her level of involvement and her management responsibilities. Her CV
claim to be "the youngest ever senior executive" at Barclays was said to be
"categorically not true" Her published CV had claimed that she was "head-hunted
from Barclays to establish a new funds management business" as "managing
director of DPFM Ltd". But DPFM was owned by her brother-in-law and Companies
House records show that she was marketing director not managing director. She
was also named as chief investment officer of Invesco Perpetual in a "Who's Who"
entry; but the actual chief investment officer at the time, Bob Yerbury, said
that she reported to him and did not make investment decisions. Yerbury attached
no weight to the controversy concerning the presentation of her career, saying
he had no doubts about her honesty.

Penny Mordaunt, a Leadsom supporter, described the reports as "a concerted
effort to rubbish a stellar career". Leadsom then issued an amended CV, which
The Guardian said gave her job title at Barclays "as deputy financial
institutions director, not – as previously stated – financial institutions
director." Leadsom defended her CV in a BBC interview, saying claims of it being
exaggerated were "ridiculous". "I have not changed my CV," she said. "I was
always very clear; I was senior investment officer working very closely with the
chief investment officer. I have been very clear; I'm not a funds manager. I
was, in Barclays and BZW, managing huge teams of people and large budgets and
responsible for the trading relationships. To be very careful not to mislead,
Barclays is a very big player in the large corporate and institutional banking
world, and so the trading relationships are enormous – billions and billions and
billions of pounds. So, when I was there as the financial institutions director
[sic] responsible for UK banking relationship, the responsibility was for
billions of pounds of trading lines and facilities to those companies … I've
never said I was a fund manager and I've never been a fund manager", she said.
According to FSA records she was authorised to run money for only three months.

Leadsom's comments in an interview with The Times were interpreted as hinting
that that her being a mother meant that she was a better choice for Prime
Minister than May, who has not been able to have children for health reasons,
because it meant that she had "a very real stake" in the future. She said that
she "did not want this to be 'Andrea has children, Theresa hasn't' because I
think that would be really horrible". After The Times published the story, with
the headline "Being a mother gives me an edge on May", Leadsom said that she was
"disgusted" by the article, which was the "exact opposite of what I said". The
Times later released a partial transcript of the comments, and when Leadsom
supporter Penny Mordaunt said that it was trying to "smear" Leadsom, The Times
released an audio recording. Her comments were widely criticised with fellow
Conservative MPs including Sarah Woolaston and Anna Soubry suggesting the
remarks showed she lacked the judgement to be Prime Minister and calling upon
her to withdraw. Alan Duncan described her remarks as "vile." Tim Loughton,
Leadsom's campaign manager for the leadership contest, claimed that the
establishment were ganging up on her.

Leadsom apologised to Theresa May for her remarks and said that she was "guilty
of naivety" and that the controversy over her remarks had made her cry.

In an interview with The Times, Andrea Leadsom suggested men should not be hired
to look after young children as they might be paedophiles. In the interview she
said: "As an employer we’re not, let’s face it, most of us don’t employ men as
nannies, most of us don’t ... Now you can call that sexist, I call that cautious
and very sensible when you look at the stats. Your odds are stacked against you
if you employ a man. .. We know paedophiles are attracted to working with
children. I’m sorry but they’re the facts.".

She promised to publish her tax returns when she made it to the final ballot of
the leadership election. Three days later she published "one year of tax
information after rival Theresa May released four years’ worth of tax returns".
Richard Murphy, director of Tax Research UK, a tax campaign group, said “This
isn’t her tax return, it’s a tax computation...It’s a summary of numerical
information but not an explanation of where it came from or what tax is due. It
excludes all the information that might be of interest, so she has not published
her tax return.”

Former conservative leader Iain Duncan Smith alleged that the intensity and
nature of the sniping at Andrea Leadsom revealed ulterior motives, unconnected
to her fitness for the post, saying to journalist Robert Peston that they
indicated "a kind of real 'black-ops' operation to denigrate her reputation",
writing later it constituted a "concerted and brutal attempt to destroy her
character". Allison Pearson in the Sunday Telegraph said, "I have no doubt
whatsoever that Leadsom became the target of a brutal and sustained character
assassination." The next day she wrote, "Andrea Leadsom has nothing to be
ashamed of: her conscience is clear. Those who sought to destroy her should
examine theirs, if they can find it." Norman Tebbit described the efforts to
remove her candidature as an intense smear campaign, saying that he suspected
they may have arisen from her opposition to gay marriage as much as her
Euroscepticism.

On 11 July 2016 Leadsom withdrew from the Conservative leadership election,
stating that she did not have enough support for her cause, with only a quarter
of the votes from the parliamentary party. The previous day The Sunday Times had
reported a rumour that up to 20 Tory MPs would quit the party if Leadsom won the
leadership contest; this was later supported by reports in other news media but
"denied by MPs" according to The Guardian.

In her statement Leadsom said "the interests of our country are best served by
the immediate appointment of a strong and well-supported prime minister. I am
therefore withdrawing from the leadership election, and I wish Mrs May the very
greatest success." However, her campaign manager, MP Tim Loughton spoke about an
"onslaught of often very personal attacks from colleagues and journalists" as
well as "underhand tactics against decent people". Leadsom had certainly been
under pressure from the news media, with reports criticising her exaggeration of
business and management experience and her suggestion that motherhood
strengthened her candidacy for Prime Minister. Leadsom charged The Times with
"gutter journalism" in response to the article about the motherhood issue. The
Times subsequently released the audio tapes of the interview to confirm
Leadsom's statement. Although she subsequently apologised "for any hurt I have
caused" to Theresa May, she also related that she had felt "under attack, under
enormous pressure … It has been shattering."

Her resignation statement did not touch on either controversy or her personal
feelings. Instead, she thanked the 84 MPs who had supported her, conceding that
"this is less than 25% of the parliamentary party and ... I do not believe this
is sufficient support to win a strong and stable government should I win the
leadership election". After her appointment as a Cabinet minister, other
comments that Leadsom had made during the leadership race came to light and also
led to criticism. During the 6 July 2016 interview with The Times, she had
stated that men were more likely to be paedophiles than women and hence, were
not suitable to be hired for jobs in daycare. Several MPs in opposition parties
called for May to dismiss Leadsom from the Cabinet but the prime minister
declined to do so.

The Energy Minister in Cameron's Cabinet, Leadsom was moved from that position
during May's cabinet shuffle on 14 July 2016, becoming Secretary of State for
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs.

Leadsom was involved with NORPIP, the Northamptonshire Parent Infant
Partnership, a charity providing therapeutic support to help parents bond with
their babies who have insecure attachment, and with PIPUK, the national body for
Parent Infant Partnerships which set up branches in four further counties since
its inception. The NORPIP branch was originally set up with majority funding
from the Jersey-based Ana Leaf Foundation, of which Leadsom's sister Hayley,
wife of Peter de Putron, is a trustee. NORPIP's original clinical director later
described how she had resigned after six months, due to concerns that the
charity was promoting messages that did not fully accord with the evidence base;
however she stated that, three years on, she was confident that the clinicians
recruited after she had left had been able to establish a high quality service,
so did not wish to imply any concern about the services they provided.

She married Ben Leadsom in 1993 and has two sons and one daughter. Following the
birth of her first child, she suffered from postnatal depression for several
months.

Leadsom states that Christianity has a central role in her life. She told Tim
Ross of The Daily Telegraph: "I am a very committed Christian. I think my values
and everything I do is driven by that." She participates in "various Bible
studies groups" with other parliamentarians and prays "all the time" and has
discussed her Christian faith openly in a video hosted on the website of the all
party parliamentary group Christians in Parliament.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nigel_Farage

Nigel Paul Farage (/ˈfærɑːʒ/; born 3 April 1964) is a British politician,
broadcaster and political analyst who was the leader of the UK Independence
Party (UKIP) from 2006 to 2009 and again from 2010 to 2016. Since 1999 he has
been an MEP for South East England. He co-chairs the Europe of Freedom and
Direct Democracy (formerly "Europe of Freedom and Democracy") group. A prominent
Eurosceptic in the UK, he has been noted for his sometimes controversial
speeches in the European Parliament and has strongly criticised the euro
currency.

Farage was a founding member of UKIP, having left the Conservative Party in 1992
after the signing of the Maastricht Treaty. After unsuccessfully campaigning in
European and Westminster parliamentary elections for UKIP since 1994, he was
elected MEP for South East England in the 1999 European Parliament election. He
was subsequently re-elected in 2004, 2009 and, most recently, at the 2014
European parliament election.

In September 2006, Farage became the UKIP Leader and led the party through the
2009 European Parliament Election, when it won the second highest share of the
popular vote, defeating Labour and the Liberal Democrats with over two million
votes. He stepped down in November 2009 to concentrate on contesting Buckingham,
the constituency of the Speaker, John Bercow, at the 2010 general election,
coming third. In November 2010, Farage successfully stood in the 2010 UKIP
leadership contest, following the resignation of Lord Pearson of Rannoch.

Farage announced his resignation as leader when he did not win the South Thanet
seat in Kent at the 2015 general election, but his resignation was rejected and
he remained in his post. In June 2016, Farage was a prominent supporter of the
successful campaign for a vote in favour of leaving the EU in the UK EU
membership referendum. On 4 July 2016, Farage again announced his resignation as
leader of UKIP, triggering a leadership election. Diane James was elected to
succeed him, but she resigned as leader after just 18 days and Farage became
interim leader on 5 October 2016. A second leadership election was held in
November, which was won by Paul Nuttall, who thus succeeded Farage.

Farage was ranked second in The Daily Telegraph's Top 100 most influential
right-wingers poll in October 2013, behind Prime Minister David Cameron. He was
also named "Briton of the Year" by The Times in 2014.

Farage was born in Downe in Kent, England, as the son of Barbara (née Stevens)
and Guy Justus Oscar Farage. The Farage name comes from a distant Huguenot
ancestor. One of his great-grandfathers was born to German parents who migrated
to London in the 19th century. His grandfather, Private Harry Farage, fought in
World War I and was wounded near Vimy Ridge at Arras. His father was a
stockbroker who worked in the City of London. A 2012 BBC Radio 4 profile
described Guy Farage as an alcoholic who left the family home when Nigel was
five years old.

From 1975 to 1982, Farage was educated at Dulwich College, an independent school
having what he described as a wide social mix in south London. In his
autobiography he pays tribute to the careers advice he received there from
England Test cricketer John Dewes, "who must have spotted that I was quite
ballsy, probably good on a platform, unafraid of the limelight, a bit noisy and
good at selling things".

On leaving school in 1982, he decided not to go to university, but to work in
the City, trading commodities at the London Metal Exchange. Initially, he joined
the American commodity operation of brokerage firm Drexel Burnham Lambert,
transferring to Crédit Lyonnais Rouse in 1986. He joined Refco in 1994, and
Natexis Metals in 2003.

Farage was active in the Conservative Party from his school days, having seen a
visit to his school by Enoch Powell and Keith Joseph. However, he voted for the
Green Party in 1989 because of what he saw as their then "sensible" and
Eurosceptic policies. He left the Conservatives in 1992 in protest at Prime
Minister John Major government's signing of the Treaty on European Union at
Maastricht. He was a founding member of UKIP in 1993.

Farage was elected to the European Parliament in 1999 and re-elected in 2004,
2009 and 2014. In 1999 the BBC spent four months filming a documentary about his
European election campaign but did not air it. Farage, then head of the UKIP's
South East office, asked for a video and had friends make copies which were sold
for £5 through the UKIP's magazine. Surrey Trading Standards investigated and
Farage admitted the offence. Farage is presently the leader of the 24-member
UKIP contingent in the European Parliament, and co-leader of the multinational
Eurosceptic group, Europe of Freedom and Direct Democracy. Farage was ranked the
fifth most influential MEP by Politico in 2016, who described him as "one of the
two most effective speakers in the chamber".

On 18 November 2004, Farage announced in the European Parliament that Jacques
Barrot, then French Commissioner-designate, had been barred from elected office
in France for two years, after being convicted in 2000 of embezzling £2 million
from government funds and diverting it into the coffers of his party. He said
that French President Jacques Chirac had granted Barrot amnesty and initial BBC
reports said that, under French Law, it was perhaps illegal to mention that
conviction. The prohibition in question applies only to French officials in the
course of their duties. The President of the Parliament, Josep Borrell, enjoined
him to retract his comments under threat of "legal consequences". The following
day it was confirmed that Barrot had received an 8-month suspended jail sentence
in the case, and that this had been quickly expunged by the amnesty decided by
Chirac and his parliamentary majority. The Socialist and Liberal groups in the
European Parliament then joined forces with UKIP in demanding the resignation of
Barrot for failing to disclose the conviction during his confirmation hearings.

In early 2005, Farage requested that the European Commission disclose where the
individual Commissioners had spent their holidays. The Commission did not
provide the information requested, on the basis that the Commissioners had a
right of privacy. The German newspaper Die Welt reported that the President of
the European Commission, José Manuel Barroso, had spent a week on the yacht of
the Greek shipping billionaire Spiros Latsis. It emerged soon afterwards that
this had occurred a month before the Commission under Barroso's predecessor
Romano Prodi approved 10.3 million euros of Greek state aid for Latsis's
shipping company. It also became known that Peter Mandelson, then the British EU
Commissioner, had accepted a trip to Jamaica from an unrevealed source.

Farage persuaded around 75 MEPs from across the political divide to back a
motion of no confidence in Barroso, which would be sufficient to compel Barroso
to appear before the European Parliament to be questioned on the issue. The
motion was successfully tabled on 12 May 2005, and Barroso appeared before
Parliament at a debate on 26 May 2005. The motion was heavily defeated. A
Conservative MEP, Roger Helmer, was expelled from his group, the European
People's Party – European Democrats (EPP-ED), in the middle of the debate by
that group's leader Hans-Gert Poettering as a result of his support for Farage's
motion.

On 12 September 2006, Farage was elected leader of UKIP with 45 per cent of the
vote, 20 percentage points ahead of his nearest rival. He pledged to bring
discipline to the party and to maximise UKIP's representation in local,
parliamentary and other elections. In a PM programme interview on BBC Radio 4
that day he pledged to end the public perception of UKIP as a single-issue party
and to work with allied politicians in the Better Off Out campaign, committing
himself not to stand against the MPs who have signed up to that campaign.

In his maiden speech to the UKIP conference, on 8 October 2006, Farage told
delegates that the party was "at the centre-ground of British public opinion"
and the "real voice of opposition". He said: "We've got three social democratic
parties in Britain – Labour, Lib Dem and Conservative are virtually
indistinguishable from each other on nearly all the main issues" and "you can't
put a cigarette paper between them and that is why there are nine million people
who don't vote now in general elections that did back in 1992."

At 10pm on 19 October 2006, Farage took part in a three-hour live interview and
phone-in with James Whale on the national radio station talkSPORT. Four days
later, Whale announced on his show his intention to stand as UKIP's candidate in
the 2008 London Mayoral Election. Farage said that Whale "not only has guts, but
an understanding of what real people think". Whale later decided not to stand
and UKIP was represented by Gerard Batten.

Farage stood again for the UKIP leadership in 2010 (having stood down the year
before, to focus on his unsuccessful campaign in the Buckingham election) after
his successor Lord Pearson had stood down, and on 5 November 2010 it was
announced he had won the leadership contest.

In May 2014 Farage led the UKIP to win the EU Election with 4,376,635 votes, the
first time a UK political party other than Labour or Conservatives had won a
national election in over 100 years. Farage was returned as MEP for the South
East region, a seat he has represented since 1999.

As an MEP Farage leads the Europe of Freedom and Direct Democracy grouping in
the European Parliament.

On 8 May 2015, Farage resigned as leader of UKIP after he failed to win the seat
of Thanet South in the general election held the previous day, although he kept
open the possibility of re-entering the ensuing leadership contest. In his
autobiography, The Purple Revolution, he had written:

On 11 May it was announced that Farage would continue to serve as the party’s
leader, with the BBC reporting: "Party chairman Steve Crowther said the national
executive committee believed the election campaign had been a ‘great success’
and members had ‘unanimously’ rejected Mr Farage's letter of resignation".
Interviewed about his continued leadership by the BBC the following day, Farage
said: "I resigned. I said I'd resign. I turned up to the NEC meeting with letter
in hand fully intending to carry that through. They unanimously said they didn't
want me to do that, they presented me with petitions, signatures, statements
from candidates saying it would be a bad thing for UKIP. So I left the meeting,
went and sat in darkened room to think about what to do, and decided for the
interest of the party I would accept their kind offer for me to stay and tear up
the letter." He added that he would consider standing for parliament again
should a by-election be called in a Labour-held seat.

Farage resigned as UKIP leader on 4 July 2016 with the following comment,
"During the [Brexit] referendum I said I wanted my country back … now I want my
life back" and added that this resignation was final: "I won’t be changing my
mind again, I can promise you", apparently referring to his two previous
resignations (in 2009 and 2015).

Farage had unsuccessfully contested British parliamentary elections for UKIP
five times, both before and after his election as an MEP in 1999. Under the 2002
European Union decision to forbid MEPs from holding a dual mandate, if he were
to be elected to the House of Commons, he would have to resign his seat as MEP.

When he contested the Bromley & Chislehurst constituency in a May 2006
by-election, following the death of Eurosceptic Conservative MP Eric Forth,
Farage came third, winning 8 per cent of the vote, beating the Labour Party
candidate. This was the second-best by-election result recorded by UKIP out of
25 results, and the first time since the Liverpool Walton by-election in 1991
that a party in government had been pushed into fourth place in a parliamentary
by-election on mainland Britain.

In January 2007, the French farmers' leader Joseph Daul was elected to lead the
European People's Party–European Democrats (EPP-ED), the European Parliamentary
grouping which then included the British Conservatives. UKIP almost immediately
revealed that Daul had been under judicial investigation in France since 2004 as
part of an inquiry into the alleged misuse of public funds worth €16 million
(£10.6 million) by French farming unions." It was not suggested that Daul had
personally benefited, but was accused of "complicity and concealment of the
abuse of public funds." Daul accused Farage of publicising the investigation for
political reasons and threatened to sue Farage, but did not do so though the
court dropped all charges against him.

Charles, Prince of Wales was invited to speak to the European Parliament on 14
February 2008; in his speech he called for EU leadership in the battle against
climate change. During the standing ovation that followed, Farage was the only
MEP to remain seated, and he went on to describe the Prince's advisers as "naïve
and foolish at best." Farage continued: "How can somebody like Prince Charles be
allowed to come to the European Parliament at this time to announce he thinks it
should have more powers? It would have been better for the country he wants to
rule one day if he had stayed home and tried to persuade Gordon Brown to give
the people the promised referendum on the Treaty of Lisbon." The leader of the
UK Labour Party's MEPs, Gary Titley, accused Farage of anti-Royalism. Titley
said: "I was embarrassed and disgusted when the Leader of the UK Independence
Party, Nigel Farage, remained firmly seated during the lengthy standing ovation
Prince Charles received. I had not realised Mr Farage's blind adherence to
right-wing politics involved disloyalty and discourtesy to the Royal Family. He
should be thoroughly ashamed of himself and should apologise to the British
people he represents."

In May 2009, The Observer reported a Foreign Press Association speech given by
Farage in which he had said that over his period as a Member of the European
Parliament he had received a total of £2 million of taxpayers' money in staff,
travel, and other expenses. In response, Farage said that in future all UKIP
MEPs would provide monthly expense details.

After the speech of Herman Van Rompuy on 24 February 2010 to the European
Parliament, Farage – to protests from other MEPs – addressed the former Belgian
Prime Minister and first long-term President of the European Council saying that
he had the "charisma of a damp rag and the appearance of low grade bank clerk".
Farage questioned the legitimacy of Van Rompuy's appointment, asking, "Who are
you? I'd never heard of you, nobody in Europe had ever heard of you." He also
asserted that Van Rompuy's "intention [is] to be the quiet assassin of European
democracy and of the European nation states". Van Rompuy commented afterwards,
"There was one contribution that I can only hold in contempt, but I'm not going
to comment further." After refusing to apologise for behaviour that was, in the
words of the President of the European Parliament, Jerzy Buzek, "inappropriate,
unparliamentary and insulting to the dignity of the House", Farage was
reprimanded and had his right to ten days' allowance (expenses) "docked".

Questioned by Camilla Long of The Times, Farage described his speech: "it wasn't
abusive, it was right."

On 4 September 2009, Farage resigned as the UKIP's leader to focus on his
campaign to become Member of Parliament for Buckingham at Westminster in the
2010 general election. He later told The Times journalist Camilla Long that UKIP
internal fights took up far too much time.

Farage stood against sitting Buckingham MP, John Bercow, the newly elected
Speaker of the House of Commons, despite the convention that the Speaker, as a
political neutral, is not normally challenged in his or her bid for re-election
by any of the major parties.

Farage came third with 8,401 votes. Bercow was re-elected and in second place
with 10,331 votes was John Stevens, a former Conservative MEP who campaigned as
an independent accompanied by "Flipper the Dolphin" (a reference to MPs flipping
second homes).

On 6 May 2010, the morning of the election, Farage was travelling in a
two-seater PZL-104 Wilga aircraft with a pro-UKIP banner attached, when the
plane crashed. Farage suffered injuries that were described as
non-life-threatening. Although his injuries were originally described as minor,
his sternum and ribs were broken and his lung punctured. The Air Accidents
Investigation Branch (AAIB) report said that the aeroplane was towing a banner,
which caught in the tailplane, forcing the nose down.

On 1 December 2010, Justin Adams, the pilot of the aircraft involved in the
accident, was charged with threatening to kill Farage in a separate incident. He
was also charged with threatening to kill an AAIB official involved in the
investigation into the accident. In April 2011, the pilot was found guilty of
making death threats. The judge said that the defendant was "clearly extremely
disturbed" at the time the offences happened, adding "He is a man who does need
help. If I can find a way of giving him help I will."

UKIP forgot to put their party name on their candidate's ballot paper for the
London mayoral election, 2012, Laurence Webb appearing as "a fresh choice for
London". Farage described the mistake as an internal error. Interviewed the
following Sunday by Andrew Neil and asked about "the game plan", Farage welcomed
the "average 13% vote" across the country, and stated that the party was
preparing for county council elections in 2013, European elections in 2014 and a
general election in 2015.

Asked what would happen to UKIP if the Conservatives made a manifesto commitment
to a European Referendum, Farage said they had already failed to honour a "cast
iron" commitment for a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty. Challenging Farage's
viewpoint, Neil said that UKIP aspired to come top of the European elections,
but while UKIP wanted to join the big time they were still seen as
"unprofessional, amateur and even unacceptable." In an interview, Farage
described Baroness Warsi as "the lowest grade Chairman the Tory Party has ever
had." He was voted politician of the year by the online service MSN.

In May 2012 Farage was interviewed by Karen Coleman of the Irish Independent
about the campaign in Ireland against the Irish fiscal treaty. Ireland had no
anti-EU MEPs and according to Pat the Cope Gallagher MEP, UKIP's involvement was
counterproductive as "Irish voters strongly dislike foreigners like Mr Farage
telling them how to vote". Coleman who believed the campaign had "little to do
with what's best for Ireland" described the campaign as "particularly egregious"
and said the interview became 'nasty' when she asked Farage about the campaign
funding.

In May 2013 Farage led UKIP to its best-ever performance in a UK election. The
party received 23 per cent of the vote in the local elections, winning 147
council seats, and placing it only 2 points behind the governing Conservative
party and 9 points ahead of the Liberal Democrats. Farage was mobbed by
well-wishers as he made his way to his favourite pub, the Marquis of Granby, for
a celebratory drink. He called the victory "a real sea change in British
politics". Subsequently, polling agency Survation found that 22 per cent of
voters intended to support UKIP in the 2015 General Election.

In May 2013, Farage was interrupted by protesters during a press conference in
the Canon's Gait pub on Edinburgh's Royal Mile. The demonstration was organised
by groups including the Radical Independence Campaign and saw protesters vocally
accuse Farage of being "racist", "fascist", and a "homophobe", and tell him to
"go back to London". Farage made attempts to leave by taxi but was prevented
from doing so, and was eventually taken away in an armoured police van while
protesters continued to shout. He was trying to raise the profile of UKIP in
Scotland ahead of the Aberdeen Donside by-election; the party at that point had
no representation in the country, and took 0.91 per cent of the vote in the
previous election though it won its first Scottish MEP the following year.
During an interview with BBC's Good Morning Scotland radio show, Farage labelled
the protesters "yobbo fascist scum" before hanging up, stating that the
questions regarding the incident in Edinburgh were insulting and unpleasant.

In a second visit to Edinburgh in May 2014 Farage correctly predicted that UKIP
would win a Scottish seat in the European Parliament elections. Two hundred
protesters heckled and booed him. Thirty police in two vans were needed to
preserve order.

In the European Parliament elections in 2014, Farage led UKIP to win the highest
share of the vote. It was the first time a political party other than the Labour
Party and Conservative Party has won the popular vote in a national election
since the 1906 general election. It is also the first time a party other than
the Labour and Conservatives won the largest number of seats in a national
election since the December 1910 general election.

In June 2014, Farage declared £205,603 for gifts over 10 years, including free
use of a barn for his constituency office, which had been declared in the EU
register in Brussels each year. The Electoral Commission said that the gifts
should have been also declared in the UK within 30 days of receipt, and then
stated they were considering whether to take action against him after they
reviewed all necessary information supplied to them.

In October 2013, Farage announced on the BBC's The Andrew Marr Show that he
would stand for election as an MP at the United Kingdom general election, 2015,
most likely contesting either Folkestone and Hythe or South Thanet; meanwhile he
stated that his duty and preference was to focus on his current role as an MEP.

In August 2014, Farage was selected as the UKIP candidate for South Thanet
following local hustings. On 12 September 2014, he appeared at a pro-union rally
with Scottish UKIP MEP David Coburn ahead of Scotland's independence referendum.

In October 2014, Farage was invited to take part in prospective Leaders' debates
on BBC, ITV, Channel 4 and Sky ahead of the 2015 General Election. UKIP
indicated that it would consider taking legal action were the party excluded, in
contravention of established broadcast media rules, from televised Party
Leaders' debates in advance of the 2015 General Election. The 7-way leaders' TV
debate was broadcast by ITV on 2 April 2015 from MediaCityUK, Salford Quays. Of
three polls taken immediately afterwards, the ComRes poll had Farage as joint
winner, alongside Labour's Ed Miliband and Conservative David Cameron.

In March 2015, Farage declared in his book The Purple Revolution that he would
step down as UKIP leader should he not be elected as an MP; he stated his belief
that it would not be "credible" for him to lead UKIP without sitting in
parliament at Westminster.

On 22 March 2015, Farage was targeted by anti-UKIP activists who chased him and
his family from a pub lunch in Downe, Kent. His daughters ran away to hide and
were later found to be safe. Farage, when asked what he thought about the
incident, called the protesters "scum".

Farage was unsuccessful in his bid to become MP for South Thanet and announced
his resignation as the leader of UKIP, citing that he is a "man of his word"
since he promised to resign if he did not win his seat. However, on 11 May 2015,
the party chairman said they would not accept Mr Farage's post-election
resignation because the party's "election campaign had been a great success".

A row subsequently developed within the party, in which MEP and campaign chief
Patrick O'Flynn described Farage's public image as "snarling, thin-skinned,
aggressive" and said he risked turning the party into a "personality cult".
O'Flynn accused Farage of paying too much attention to advisors that "would like
to take UKIP in the direction of some hard-right, ultra-aggressive American Tea
Party-type movement", singling out the NHS and gun control liberalisation as
particular issues. Raheem Kassam, Farage's chief of staff was later sacked as a
result, whilst O'Flynn insisted he continued to support Farage as party leader.
Farage also faced a number of calls from senior figures within the party to
stand down.

Following the election a UKIP spokesman acknowledged that after a series of
threatening attacks on Farage it had sent an informant into the Thanet branch of
the protest organisation Stand Up to UKIP, stating "in order to provide
reasonable security it was of course necessary to have information from the
inside", an approach he said was used by "a great many security operations
tasked with protecting the safety and wellbeing of a targeted individual".
According to The Guardian, the informant is alleged to have actively encouraged
members to commit criminal damage. Farage had said he was the victim of "trade
union-funded activists" who were inciting vandalism.

In January 2016 Farage told The Mail on Sunday that he believed his car had been
tampered with in October 2015, as he had been forced to stop when his car's
wheel nuts came loose. He reported that he had spoken with the French police but
did not wish to pursue the matter any further. The Times, however, said Farage's
story was untrue, and that Dunkirk prosecutors had no reason to suspect foul
play or the police would have started an investigation. The owner of the
breakdown garage concerned had said the problem was probably shoddy repair work,
but he had been unable to communicate directly with Farage. Farage later said he
had made a "terrible, terrible mistake" in speaking to journalists and that a
Sunday newspaper had wrongly turned his claims of tampering into an
assassination attempt.

Although previously denouncing tax avoidance in a speech to the European
Parliament, in which he attacked European bureaucrats who earned £100,000 a year
and paid 12 per cent tax under EU rules, Farage said in 2013 that he had hired a
tax advisor to set up the Farage Family Educational Trust 1654, a trust that
Farage said was used "for inheritance purposes", on the Isle of Man. Farage
later described this "as standard practice", but insisted he "decided I didn't
want it. I never ever used it. The Isle of Man is not a tax haven." Farage has
since said that this was a mistake, in part because it cost him too much money,
but has criticised the political discourse surrounding tax avoidance as a "race
to the bottom". The BBC noted that "The Isle of Man was one of the UK's crown
dependencies which signed an agreement on corporate disclosure at a recent
meeting with David Cameron amid claims that individuals and firms are using
offshore locations to reduce their tax liabilities", adding that the Isle of Man
rejects any allegations that are used for the purpose of tax avoidance.

Farage said in 2014 that most legal tax avoidance was "okay" after he was
questioned on why £45,000 of his income was paid into his private company rather
than a personal bank account, saying that criticism of his actions was
"ridiculous". In the wake of the Panama Papers leak, Farage also said that the
possibility of him releasing his tax return was a "big no" as "I think in this
country what people earn is regarded as a private matter", and criticised David
Cameron for being hypocritical, especially with regards to his past comments
about Jimmy Carr's tax avoidance.

Although he was a member of the European Parliament, Farage campaigned to leave
the EU as a key figurehead for the British exit from the EU in 2016. Polls on
the day of the vote suggested defeat for the leave campaign, though they were
successful with 52 per cent of the vote. Jean-Claude Juncker promptly told all
UKIP members to leave the Parliament. Farage also made the suggestion of a
future second referendum in an interview with the Daily Mirror if Brexit lost
but the result was closer than 52-48.

On 28 June 2016 Farage made a speech in the European Parliament claiming that a
hypothetical failure for the EU to forge a trade deal with an exited UK would
"be far worse for you than it would be for us" to heckling and laughing by
Parliament members. He insulted his fellow MEPs, claiming that "virtually none"
of them had ever had done "a proper job" in their lives. Media around the world
covered Farage's speech, including his comment: "... when I came here 17 years
ago, and I said that I wanted to lead a campaign to get Britain to leave the
European Union, you all laughed at me. Well I have to say, you're not laughing
now are you?" and his prediction that Britain will not be the only country to
leave the EU. In response, Guy Verhofstadt compared Farage's referendum posters
with Nazi propaganda and credited the Brexit campaign with causing a
multi-billion loss in the stock exchange. Explicitly addressing Farage,
Verhofstadt added, "... Ok. Let’s be positive. Finally, we're going to get rid
of the biggest waste in the budget of the (European) Union, that we have paid
for 17 years, your salary."

Farage resigned as leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party on 4 July
2016, saying that: "It's right that I should now stand aside as leader. What I
said during the referendum campaign is I want my country back. What I'm saying
today is I want my life back. And it begins right now" and "I have never been,
and I have never wanted to be, a career politician." Jean-Claude Juncker,
President of the European Commission, described Farage as a "retro-nationalist",
Caroline Lucas, Green Party MP for Brighton Pavilion, said that his legacy is
"toxic and unforgivable" and that "He has used his position to whip up hatred
against migrants and divert attention from the real challenges this country is
facing", and former Labour Party leader, Ed Miliband, said: "It's a legacy of
stirring up division. I am not sorry to see Nigel Farage leave the political
scene". However, Paul Nuttall, a UKIP MEP, tweeted that Farage's "drive and
belief shook establishment politics to its core and gave us a voice" and Suzanne
Evans, former Deputy Chairman of UKIP, said that Farage's resignation surprised
her, but "there is room still in Britain for UKIP". Writing in The Spectator,
after this resignation when it was thought he was leaving politics, the
journalist Rod Liddle described Farage as: "The most important British
politician of the last decade and the most successful. His resignation leaves a
hole in our political system. With enormous intelligence and chutzpah and a
refreshingly unorthodox approach, he built UKIP up from nothing to become
established as our third largest party and succeeded in his overriding ambition
– to see the UK vote to leave the European Union."

Following a legal challenge to the use of the Royal Prerogative to invoke
article 50, Farage appeared on television with Gina Miller. Miller stated that
"politicians had lied all the way through" and the Referendum act clearly said
that the result was advisory. Farage also agreed that it was advisory. Farage
was appearing on the Andrew Marr Show where he was described by the host as a
lifelong political "insurgent." Although he talked of a peaceful protest he
warned of unprecedented political anger if Parliament blocked Brexit. Miller
pointed out that parliamentary democracy required parliament to debate issues
and that Farage had spent the whole Brexit campaign arguing for parliamentary
sovereignty. Calling his warnings "the politics of the gutter" Tim Farron said
the British judges had merely interpreted British law and that fortunately
Farage was the only person talking about taking to the streets. Miller has
previously called Farage irresponsible and has blamed him and the tabloid media
for death threats against her. She stated in November 2016 that she would not
take legal action against those who had threatened her.

On 7 November 2016, Farage announced he would lead a 100,000 strong march to the
Supreme court timed for when it starts hearing the Government appeal. On 27
November 2016, it was reported the march was being cancelled out of concerns it
could be hijacked by far right groups English Defence League and British
National Party. The next day, Paul Nuttall became the new UKIP party leader
after Farage decided to step aside to strengthen his relationship with U.S.
President-elect Donald Trump.

In a May 2016 interview with Robert Peston, Farage said that, whilst he had
reservations on the views and character of 2016 Republican presidential
candidate Donald Trump, if he were an eligible U.S. voter he would vote for
Trump in 2016 presidential election, to prevent Hillary Clinton becoming
president. In July 2016, Farage visited the Republican convention in Cleveland
with his office manager and "close colleague" George Cottrell. Both Farage and
Cottrell appeared on American television and engaged in discussions with Trump's
aides before Cottrell was arrested by the FBI on 21 federal counts of fraud,
money laundering and extortion. Cottrell has pleaded not guilty to the charges;
Farage "was unaware of Cottrell's alleged illegal activities and his arrest by
the FBI came as a shock." Cottrell's arrest left Farage unable to access his
personal diary.

In October 2016, Farage praised Trump for "dominating" Hillary Clinton,
comparing him to a silverback gorilla. Following revelations of a 2005 audio
recording in which Trump making lewd remarks about women, Farage said that
Trump's comments were "ugly" but described them as "alpha male boasting" and
stated that women also made remarks they would not want to see reported.
Farage's comments prompted several senior UKIP members to privately express
concern, and prompted public condemnation of Farage from two UKIP MEPs, Jane
Collins and William Dartmouth. As more publicity appeared about Trump's alleged
groping and as the criticisms increased, Farage said he disagreed with Trump's
comments about groping women, or his comments on Muslim immigration.

Farage is reported to have had close links with Trump's chief strategist, Steve
Bannon, since at least 2014, when Bannon scheduled meetings for Farage with
right-wing figures in Washington. In his book, The Purple Revolution: The Year
That Changed Everything, Farage described Bannon as "my sort of chap."

After Trump's victory, Farage said that he "couldn't be happier" and in the same
interview referred to outgoing president Barack Obama a "loathsome individual"
and "that Obama creature", remarks which prompted criticism. Labour MP John
Woodcock criticized Farage's comments, saying they had "clear racist
undertones." Farage was the first British politician to speak to Trump after his
election, meeting with Trump in his eponymous Manhattan tower.

In November 2016, after becoming president-elect, Trump publicly suggested, via
Twitter post, that the UK government name Farage as British ambassador to the
United States. Trump's expression of a preference for a foreign nation's
ambassador was "a startling break with diplomatic protocol" that was
unprecedented in recent U.S. history. The British government rejected the
suggestion, with a Downing Street spokesman and Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson
stressing that there was no vacancy in the position.

On 20 January 2017, the day of Trump's presidential inauguration, U.S. news
channel Fox News announced it had hired Farage as a commentator. He has since
provided political analysis for both the main Fox News channel and its sister
channel Fox Business Network. Farage also began hosting a talk show on the
British radio station LBC for four nights a week.

In 2017. Farage called for the departure of Ukip's only MP Douglas Carswell. He
said in The Daily Telegraph: "I think there is little future for Ukip with him
staying inside this party. The time for him to go is now." It was reported that
there was controversy within Ukip over whether Carswell had tried to prevent
Farage receiving a knighthood. It was reported the MP had suggested Farage
should instead be given an OBE "for services to headline writers".

From taking office as a UKIP MEP in 1999, Farage has often voiced opposition to
the "euro project". His argument is that "a one-size-fits-all interest rate"
cannot work for countries with structurally different economies, often using the
example of Greece and Germany to emphasise contrast.

Farage strongly opposes the use of bailouts and says that "buying your own debt
with taxpayers' money" will not solve the problem and that, "if we do, the next
debt crisis won't be a country ... it will be the European Central Bank itself".

On the issue of welfare, Farage wants migrants to live in the UK for five years
before being able to claim benefits, and for them to be ineligible for tax
credits. He believes that tax avoidance is caused by "punitive tax rates", and
wants "fairer" taxes as a way to prevent it.

Farage declared himself in favour of the Alternative Vote system of May 2011,
saying first-past-the-post would be a "nightmare" for UKIP. The party's stance
has to be decided by its central policy-making committee, although Farage has
expressed a preference for the AV+ system as it "would retain the constituency
link and then also the second ballot ensured there were no wasted votes". After
the 2015 general election, in which UKIP took a lower proportion of seats than
votes, Farage called the first-past-the-post voting system (FPTP) "totally
bankrupt", although Farage said: "I completely lost faith in [FPTP] in 2005 when
Blair was returned with a 60 seat majority on 36 per cent of the vote, or 22 per
cent if you factor in low turnout."

Farage has criticised the shutting down of coal-fired power stations and has
opposed the policy of creating wind farms as covering "Britain in ugly
disgusting ghastly windmills". In a speech made to the European parliament on 11
September 2013, Farage cited news, reported in several Rupert Murdoch-owned
papers and the Daily Mail, that the Arctic Sea ice cap had apparently grown from
2012 to 2013, claiming that this was evidence of decades "of Euro-federalism
combined with an increasing Green obsession".

Farage takes an anti-prohibitionist position on recreational drugs. In an April
2014 phone-in interview hosted by The Daily Telegraph he argued that the War on
Drugs had been lost "many, many years ago", stating that "I hate drugs, I've
never taken them myself, I hope I never do, but I just have a feeling that the
criminalisation of all these drugs is actually not really helping British
society." He argued in favour of a Royal Commission on drugs exploring all
avenues as how to most effectively legislate on drugs and deal with their
related criminal and public health problems, including the possibility of their
legalisation.

According to Farage, the smoking ban in enclosed public spaces is "silly and
illiberal"; he recommends separate smoking areas along the lines of some German
states. He believes that banning things makes them more attractive to children,
and said that "Obesity is killing more people than smoking, you could ban chip
shops, you could ban doughnuts. The point is we are big enough and ugly enough
to make our own decisions".

In his 2015 book, Farage reflected that based on his experiences, "the NHS is so
over-stretched that if you can afford private health care, you should take it,
particularly for diagnostics and preventative medicine. In the NHS, the system
is so battered and poorly run that unless you are really lucky, you will fall
through the cracks. The NHS is, however, astonishingly good at critical care.
But what testicular cancer taught me is that the NHS will probably let you down
if you need screening, fast diagnosis and an operation at a time that suits
you". He supports reform within the NHS, saying that its resources have become
stretched due to increased immigration, and blaming Labour for high costs of new
hospitals built through private finance initiatives.

Farage says that money which the NHS could spend on treating taxpayers with
serious conditions is instead spent on recent immigrants with HIV, an opinion
which has been controversial. A YouGov poll found 50 per cent of those taking
part to support Farage, with 37 per cent saying that he is scaremongering.

Farage has argued strongly in favour of a British Independence Day being
observed within the United Kingdom, on 23 June each year. On 24 June 2016, in a
televised speech on the morning of the Brexit result, he stated; "let June 23rd
go down in our history as our Independence Day", and later said that it "must
now be made a national holiday."

Farage has said that he supports Muslim immigrants who integrate to British
society, but is against those who are "coming here to take us over", citing John
Howard's Australia as a government to emulate in that regard. He told a Channel
4 documentary in 2015 that there is a "fifth column" of Islamic extremists in
the United Kingdom. Farage has said that the "basic principle" of Enoch Powell's
"Rivers of Blood speech" was correct.

In a 2014 interview on the LBC radio station, Farage said that he would feel
"concerned" if a group of Romanian men moved next door to him. When interviewer
James O'Brien inquired what would be the difference between Romanian men moving
next door and a group of German children, in reference to Farage's German wife
and children, Farage replied: "You know the difference." He later expanded on
this on the UKIP website, explaining that "if we were able to operate a proper
work permit scheme for Romanian nationals, with suitable checks, as recommended
by UKIP, then nobody would need to be concerned if a group of Romanian nationals
moved in next door to them."

Farage called on the British government in 2013 to accept more refugees from the
Syrian Civil War. He later clarified that those refugees should be of the
country's Christian minority, due to the existence of nearer Muslim-majority
safe countries. During the ensuing migration crisis, Farage alleged that the
majority of people claiming to be refugees were economic migrants, and that some
were Islamic State militants.

Farage is critical of Britain's involvement in the wars in Iraq, Afghanistan and
Libya, and cited their financial and human expenses and poor outcomes as reasons
for Britain to not become involved militarily in Syria. He has expressed fears
that rebel forces in Syria may be Islamic extremists. He said about the wars in
Iraq and Afghanistan that "Nobody should forget that the most devastating direct
consequences of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan have not been suffered by the
likes of Mr Blair, but by the civilian populations of these countries and of
course by our own brave service personnel". Farage stated that migrant exodus
from Libya had been caused by NATO military intervention, approved by David
Cameron and Nicolas Sarkozy, in the civil war in Libya.

Farage has criticised Britain's close ties with Saudi Arabia. He said: "I think
we need a complete re-appraisal of who Saudi Arabia are, what our relationship
with them is, and stop extremist talk turning the minds of young, male Muslims
in this country."

When asked in 2014 which leaders he admired, Farage said, "As an operator, but
not as a human being, I would say Putin. The way he played the whole Syria
thing. Brilliant. Not that I approve of him politically. How many journalists in
jail now?" Farage has criticised what he sees as EU militarism agitating western
Ukrainians against Russia. Later, in 2015, he said about Putin that "The
European Union, and the West, view Putin as the devil. They want to view Putin
as the devil. I’m not saying I want take him around for tea and meet mum on
Sunday afternoon … But the point is, on this bigger overall battle [against ISIS
in Syria] we need to start recognizing we’re on the same side".

In May 2012. Farage was interviewed by Karen Coleman of the Irish Independent
about the campaign in Ireland against the Irish fiscal treaty. Ireland had no
anti-EU MEPs and according to Pat the Cope Gallagher MEP, UKIP's involvement was
counterproductive as "Irish voters strongly dislike foreigners like Mr Farage
telling them how to vote." Coleman who believed the campaign had "little to do
with what's best for Ireland" described the campaign as "particularly egregious"
and said the interview became 'nasty' when she asked Farage about the campaign
funding.

During the 2016 Austrian presidential election campaign, Farage said that
Norbert Hofer, the "far-right" Freedom Party candidate, would call for a "Brexit
style referendum" if he won. Hofer however ruled out a referendum and asked
Farage not to interfere in Austria's internal politics.

In 2014, Farage said that it is UKIP policy for handguns in the UK to be
legalised and licensed, describing the current legislation, brought in after the
Dunblane school massacre, as "ludicrous". He has also said that there was no
link between responsible handgun ownership and gun crime.

Farage lives in Single Street, a hamlet in the London Borough of Bromley,
"around the corner from his mother". He has been married twice. In 1988 he
married Irish nurse Gráinne Hayes, by whom he has two children: Samuel (born
1989) and Thomas (born 1991). The couple divorced in 1997. In 1999 he married
Kirsten Mehr, a German national, and they have two children, Victoria (born
2000) and Isabelle (born 2005). His wife told the Press Association in February
2017 that the couple are living "separate lives" and Farage "moved out of the
family home a while ago". He has spoken of how his children have been teased
because of their relation to him.

He has made reference to his German wife in response to criticisms that he is
somehow "anti-Europe", while he himself says he is merely anti-EU. Farage has
employed his wife as his parliamentary secretary and in April 2014 he explained
that "nobody else could do that job".

On 25 November 1985, Farage was hit by a car after a night out, and suffered
injury to his head and left leg, the latter nearly requiring amputation. He was
in casts for 11 months, but recovered, and the nurse who treated him became his
first wife. On 26 December 1986, Farage first felt symptoms of what was later
discovered to be testicular cancer. He had the left testicle removed, and the
cancer had not spread to any other organs.

In 2010, Farage published a memoir, entitled Fighting Bull (Flying Free in
paperback), outlining the founding of UKIP and his personal and political life
so far. A second book, The Purple Revolution: The Year That Changed Everything,
was released by Biteback Publishing in 2015.

Farage is also a keen cricket fan and has appeared on Test Match Special. He
appeared in an advertisement for the bookmaker Paddy Power ahead of golf's 2014
Ryder Cup. However, due to spinal injuries since his 2010 plane crash, he cannot
play golf. He likes to relax by fishing alone at night on the Kent coast. Farage
is a smoker and also fond of beer, this forming part of his public image. Farage
is a member of the East India Club.

Farage is a Christian. In 2014 he described himself as a "somewhat lapsed"
member of the Church of England.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Game_of_Thrones_episodes

Game of Thrones is an American fantasy drama television series created by David
Benioff and D. B. Weiss. The series is based on the A Song of Ice and Fire
novels by author George R. R. Martin. The series takes place on the fictional
continents of Westeros and Essos and chronicles the power struggles among noble
families as they fight for control of the Iron Throne of the Seven Kingdoms. The
series starts when House Stark, led by Lord Eddard "Ned" Stark (Sean Bean) is
drawn into schemes against King Robert Baratheon (Mark Addy) when the Hand of
the King Jon Arryn (Robert's chief advisor) dies mysteriously.

The series premiered on April 17, 2011, on HBO. David Benioff and D. B. Weiss
both serve as executive producers along with Carolyn Strauss, Frank Doelger,
Bernadette Caulfield and George R. R. Martin. Filming for the series has taken
place in a number of locations, including Croatia, Northern Ireland, Iceland and
Spain. Episodes are broadcast on Sunday at 9:00 pm Eastern Time, and the
episodes for season one to six are between 50 and 69 minutes in length. The
first six seasons are available on DVD and Blu-ray.

As of June 26, 2016[update], 60 episodes of Game of Thrones have aired,
concluding the sixth season. The series was renewed for a seventh season in
April 2016, which will consist of seven episodes and premiere on July 16, 2017.
The series will conclude with its eighth season, which will consist of six
episodes. The show's episodes have won a number of awards, including two
Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Cimino

Michael Cimino (/tʃɪˈmiːnoʊ/ chi-MEE-noh; February 3, 1939 – July 2, 2016) was
an American film director, screenwriter, producer and author.

Cimino was born in New York City and graduated from Yale University in 1963.
Beginning his career filming commercials, he moved to Los Angeles to take up
screenwriting in 1971. After co-writing the script of Magnum Force and Silent
Running, he wrote the preliminary script Thunderbolt and Lightfoot. Clint
Eastwood read the script and sent it to his personal production company, which
allowed Cimino to direct the film. After its success, Cimino co-wrote, directed,
and produced the 1978 Academy Award-winning film The Deer Hunter. His next film,
Heaven's Gate (1980), proved to be a financial failure. Cimino directed four
movies after Heaven's Gate, but none were as successful as The Deer Hunter.

Cimino was born in New York City on February 3, 1939.[a 1] A third-generation
Italian-American, Cimino and his brothers grew up with their parents in Old
Westbury, Long Island. He was regarded as a prodigy at the private schools his
parents sent him to, but rebelled as an adolescent by consorting with
delinquents, getting into fights, and coming home drunk. Of this time, Cimino
described himself as

His father was a music publisher. Cimino says his father was responsible for
marching bands and organs playing pop music at football games.

His mother was a costume designer. After he made The Deer Hunter, she said that
she knew he had become famous because his name was in the New York Times
crossword puzzle.

Cimino graduated from Westbury High School in 1956. He entered Michigan State
University in East Lansing, Michigan. At Michigan State, Cimino majored in
graphic arts, was a member of a weight-lifting club, and participated in a group
to welcome incoming students. He graduated in 1959 with honors and won the Harry
Suffrin Advertising Award. He was described in the 1959 Red Cedar Log yearbook
as having tastes that included blondes, Thelonious Monk, Chico Hamilton, Mort
Sahl, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, Frank Lloyd Wright, and "drinking, preferably
vodka."

In Cimino's final year at Michigan State, he became art director, and later
managing editor, of the school's humor magazine Spartan. Steven Bach wrote of
Cimino's early magazine work:

At Yale, Cimino continued to study painting as well as architecture and art
history and became involved in school dramatics. In 1962, while still at Yale,
he enlisted in the U.S. Army Reserve. He trained for five months at Fort Dix,
New Jersey and had a month of medical training in Fort Sam Houston, Texas.
Cimino graduated from Yale University, receiving his BFA in 1961 and his MFA in
1963, both in painting.

After graduating from Yale, Cimino moved to Manhattan to work in Madison Avenue
advertising and became a star director of television commercials. He shot ads
for L'eggs hosiery, Kool cigarettes, Eastman Kodak, United Airlines, and Pepsi,
among others. "I met some people who were doing fashion stuff – commercials and
stills. And there were all these incredibly beautiful girls," Cimino said. "And
then, zoom – the next thing I know, overnight, I was directing commercials." For
example, Cimino directed the 1967 United Airlines commercial "Take Me Along," a
musical extravaganza in which a group of ladies sing Take Me Along (adapted from
a short-lived Broadway musical) to a group of men, presumably their husbands, to
take them on a flight. The commercial is filled with the dynamic visuals,
American symbolism and elaborate set design that would become Cimino's
trademark. "The clients of the agencies liked Cimino," remarked Charles Okun,
his production manager from 1964 to 1978. "His visuals were fabulous, but the
amount of time it took was just astronomical. Because he was so meticulous and
took so long. Nothing was easy with Michael." Through his commercial work,
Cimino met Joann Carelli, then a commercial director representative. They began
a 30-year on-again-off-again relationship.

In 1971, Cimino moved to Los Angeles to start a career as a screenwriter.
According to Cimino, it was Carelli that got him into screenwriting: "[Joann]
actually talked me into it. I'd never really written anything ever before. I
still don't regard myself as a writer. I've probably written thirteen to
fourteen screenplays by [1978] and I still don't think of myself that way. Yet,
that's how I make a living." Cimino added, "I started writing screenplays
principally because I didn't have the money to buy books or to option
properties. At that time you only had a chance to direct if you owned a
screenplay which some star wanted to do, and that's precisely what happened with
Thunderbolt and Lightfoot." Cimino gained representation from Stan Kamen of
William Morris Agency. The spec script Thunderbolt and Lightfoot was shown to
Clint Eastwood, who bought it for his production company, Malpaso and allowed
Cimino a chance to direct the film. Cimino co-wrote two scripts (the science
fiction film Silent Running and Eastwood's second Dirty Harry film, Magnum
Force) before moving on to directing. Cimino's work on Thunderbolt and Lightfoot
impressed Eastwood enough to ask him to work on the script for Magnum Force
before Thunderbolt and Lightfoot began production.

Cimino moved up to directing on the feature Thunderbolt and Lightfoot (1974).
The film stars Clint Eastwood as a Korean War vet named "Thunderbolt" who takes
a young drifter named "Lightfoot", played by Jeff Bridges, under his wing. When
Thunderbolt's old partners try to find him, he and Lightfoot make a pact with
them to pull one last big heist. Eastwood was originally slated to direct it
himself, but Cimino impressed Eastwood enough to change his mind. The film
became a solid box office success at the time, making $25,000,000 at the box
office with a budget of $4,000,000 and earned Bridges an Academy Award
nomination for Best Supporting Actor.

With the success of Thunderbolt and Lightfoot, Cimino says he "got a lot of
offers, but decided to take a gamble. I would only get involved with projects I
really wanted to do." He rejected several offers before pitching an ambitious
Vietnam War film to EMI executives in November 1976. To Cimino's surprise, EMI
accepted the film. Cimino went on to direct, co-write, and co-produce The Deer
Hunter (1978). The film stars Robert De Niro, Christopher Walken, and John
Savage as three buddies in a Pennsylvania steel mill town who fight in the
Vietnam War and rebuild their lives in the aftermath. The film went
over-schedule and over-budget, but it became a massive critical and commercial
success, and won five Oscars, including Best Director and Best Picture for
Cimino.

On the basis of his track record, Cimino was given free rein by United Artists
for his next film, Heaven's Gate (1980). The film came in several times over
budget. After its release, it proved to be a financial disaster that nearly
bankrupted the studio. Heaven's Gate became the lightning rod for the industry
perception of the loosely controlled situation in Hollywood at that time. The
film's failure marked the end of the New Hollywood era. Transamerica Corporation
sold United Artists, having lost confidence in the company and its management.

Heaven's Gate was such a devastating critical and commercial bomb that public
perception of Cimino's work was tainted in its wake; the majority of his
subsequent films achieved neither popular nor critical success. Many critics who
had originally praised The Deer Hunter became far more reserved about the
picture and about Cimino after Heaven's Gate. The story of the making of the
movie, and UA's subsequent downfall, was documented in Steven Bach's book Final
Cut. Cimino's film was somewhat rehabilitated by an unlikely source: the Z
Channel, a cable pay TV channel that at its peak in the mid-1980s served 100,000
of Los Angeles's most influential film professionals. After the unsuccessful
release of the reedited and shortened Heaven's Gate, Jerry Harvey, the channel's
programmer, decided to play Cimino's original 219-minute cut on Christmas Eve
1982. The reassembled movie received admiring reviews. The full length, director
approved version, was released on LaserDisc by MGM/UA, and later reissued on DVD
and Blu-ray by the Criterion Collection.

Cimino directed a 1985 crime drama, Year of the Dragon, which he and Oliver
Stone adapted from Robert Daley's novel. However, Year of the Dragon was also
nominated for five Razzie awards, including Worst Director and Worst Screenplay.
The film was sharply criticized for providing offensive stereotypes about
Chinese Americans. Cimino directed The Sicilian from a Mario Puzo novel in 1987.
The film bombed at the box office, costing an estimated $16 million[a 2],
grossing $5 million domestically.

In 1990, Cimino directed a remake of the Humphrey Bogart film The Desperate
Hours starring Anthony Hopkins and Mickey Rourke. The film was another
box-office disappointment, grossing less than $3 million. His last
feature-length film was 1996's Sunchaser with Woody Harrelson and Jon Seda.
While nominated for the Palme d'Or at that year's Cannes Film Festival, the film
was released to video.

Cimino's films are often marked by their visual style and controversial subject
matter. Elements of Cimino's visual sensibility include shooting in widescreen
(in a 2.35:1 aspect ratio), deliberate pacing and big set-piece/non-dialogue
sequences. The subject matter in Cimino's films frequently focuses on aspects of
American history and culture, notably disillusionment over the American Dream.
Other trademarks include the casting of non-professional actors in supporting
roles (Chuck Aspegren as Axel in The Deer Hunter, Ariane in Year of the Dragon).

Cimino frequently credited Clint Eastwood, John Ford,[a 3] Luchino Visconti and
Akira Kurosawa[a 4] as his cinematic influences. Cimino said that if it wasn't
for Eastwood, he would not be in the movies: "I owe everything to Clint." Cimino
also gave his literary references as Vladimir Nabokov, Alexander Pushkin, Leo
Tolstoy, Gore Vidal, Raymond Carver, Cormac McCarthy, the classics of Islamic
literature, Frank Norris and Steven Pinker.

Since the beginning of his film career, Cimino was attached to many projects
that either fell apart in pre-production or were jettisoned due to his
reputation following Heaven's Gate. Steven Bach wrote that despite setbacks in
Cimino's career, "he may yet deliver a film that will make his career larger
than the cautionary tale it often seems to be or, conversely, the story of
genius thwarted by the system that is still popular in certain circles." Film
historian David Thomson added to this sentiment: "The flimsy nastiness of his
last four pictures is no reason to think we have seen the last of Cimino. ... If
he ever emerges at full budgetary throttle, his own career should be his
subject." Cimino claimed he had written at least 50 scripts overall and was
briefly considered to helm The Godfather Part III.

Cimino's dream project was an adaptation of Ayn Rand's The Fountainhead. Taking
its cue from more than the novel, it was largely modeled on architect Jørn
Utzon's troubled building of the Sydney Opera House, as well as the construction
of the Empire State Plaza in Albany, New York. He wrote the script in between
Thunderbolt and Lightfoot and The Deer Hunter, and hoped to have Clint Eastwood
play Howard Roark.

Cimino spent two and a half years working with James Toback on The Life and
Dreams of Frank Costello, a biopic on the life of mafia boss Costello, for 20th
Century Fox. "We got a good screenplay together," said Cimino, "but again, the
studio, 20th Century Fox in this case, was going through management changes and
the script was put aside." Cimino added, "Costello took a long time because
Costello himself had a long, interesting life. The selection of things to film
was quite hard. While working on the Costello biopic, Cimino wrote a biography
on Janis Joplin called Pearl, both for 20th Century Fox. "It's almost a
musical," replied Cimino, "I was working with Bo Goldman on that one and we were
doing a series of rewrites." "All these projects were in the air at once,"
Cimino recalled, "I postponed The Fountainhead until we had a first draft on
Pearl, then after meetings with Jimmy began Frank Costello."

In 1984, after being unable to finalize a deal with director Herbert Ross,
Paramount Pictures offered the job of directing Footloose to Cimino. According
to screenwriter Dean Pitchford, Cimino was at the helm of Footloose for four
months, making more and more extravagant demands in terms of set construction
and overall production. In the process, Cimino reimagined the film as a
musical-comedy inspired by The Grapes of Wrath. Paramount realized that it
potentially had another Heaven's Gate on its hands. Cimino was fired and Ross
was brought on to direct the picture.

The same year Cimino was scheduled to work on The Pope of Greenwich Village,
which would have reunited him with actor Mickey Rourke from Heaven's Gate. After
Rourke and Eric Roberts signed on as the leads, Cimino wanted to finesse the
screenplay with some rewriting and restructuring. However, the rewriting would
have taken Cimino beyond the mandated start date for shooting, so Cimino and MGM
parted ways. Stuart Rosenberg was hired as a result. The film, while receiving
admiring reviews, bombed at the box office.

In 1987, Cimino attempted to make an epic saga about the 1920s Irish rebel
Michael Collins, but the film had to be abandoned due to budget, weather and
script problems. The film was to have been funded by Nelson Entertainment.
Shortly after the Michael Collins biopic was cancelled, Cimino quickly started
pre-production work on Santa Ana Wind, a contemporary romantic drama set in L.A.
The start date for shooting was to have been early December 1987. The screenplay
was written by Floyd Mutrux and the film was to be bankrolled by Nelson
Entertainment, which also backed Collins. Cimino's representative added that the
film was "about the San Fernando Valley and the friendship between two guys" and
"more intimate" than Cimino's previous big-budget work like Heaven's Gate and
the yet-to-be-released The Sicilian. However, Nelson Holdings International Ltd.
cancelled the project after disclosing that its banks, including Security
Pacific National Bank, had reduced the company's borrowing power after Nelson
failed to meet certain financial requirements in its loan agreements. A
spokesman for Nelson said the cancellation occurred "in the normal course of
business," but declined to elaborate.

One of his final projects was writing a three-hour-long adaptation of André
Malraux's 1933 novel Man's Fate, about the early days of the Chinese Revolution.
The story was to have focused on several Europeans living in Shanghai during the
tragic turmoil that characterized the onset of China's Communist regime. "The
screenplay, I think, is the best one I've ever done," Cimino once said, adding
that he had "half the money; [we're] trying to raise the other half." The
roughly $25 million project was to be filmed wholly on location in Shanghai and
would have benefited from the support of China's government, which said it would
provide some $2 million worth of local labor costs. Cimino had been scouting
locations in China since 2001. "There was never a better time to try to do Man's
Fate", Cimino said, "because Man's Fate is what it's all about right now. It's
about the nature of love, of friendship, the nature of honor and dignity. How
fragile and important all of those things are in a time of crisis." Martha De
Laurentiis, who with her husband Dino helped produce Year of the Dragon and
Desperate Hours with Cimino, read his script for Man's Fate and passed on it.
"If you edit it down, it could be a very tight, beautiful, sensational movie,"
she said, "but violent, and ultimately a subject matter that I don't think
America is that interested in."

In 2001, Cimino published his first novel, Big Jane. Later that year, the French
Minister of Culture decorated him Chevalier des Arts et des Lettres and the Prix
Littéraire Deauville 2001, an award that previously went to Norman Mailer and
Gore Vidal. "Oh, I'm the happiest, I think, I've ever been!" he said in
response. Cimino also wrote a book called Conversations en miroir with Francesca
Pollock in 2003.

Interviews with Cimino were rare; he declined all interviews with American
journalists for 10 years following Heaven's Gate and he gave his part in the
making of that film little discussion. George Hickenlooper's book Reel
Conversations and Peter Biskind's highly critical book Easy Riders, Raging Bulls
deal with the film and resulting scandal. Hickenlooper's book includes one of
the few candid discussions with Cimino; Biskind focuses on events during and
after the production as a later backdrop for the sweeping changes made to
Hollywood and the movie brat generation. Steven Bach, a former UA studio
executive, wrote Final Cut (1985), which describes in detail how Heaven's Gate
brought down United Artists. Cimino called Bach's book a "work of fiction" by a
"degenerate who never even came on the set". However, Bach's work does discuss
times in which he did appear at the shooting location to confront Cimino about
the budgetary issues.

While Al Pacino, Meryl Streep, Francis Ford Coppola, Gene Hackman, Sidney Lumet
and Robert De Niro all gave interviews for the 2009 John Cazale documentary I
Knew It Was You, Cimino refused to do so.

However, the European DVD release of The Deer Hunter contains an audio
commentary with Cimino as does the American DVD release of Year of the Dragon.

In 2011, the French movie critic Jean-Baptiste Thoret wrote a large profile on
Michael Cimino for Les Cahiers du Cinéma. Cimino appeared on the cover.

In 2013, Thoret published in France an acclaimed book, Michael Cimino, les voix
perdues de l'Amérique (lost voices of America). Flammarion. ISBN 978-2081261600

After Cimino's success with The Deer Hunter, he was considered a "second coming"
among critics. In 1985, author Michael Bliss described Michael Cimino as a
unique American filmmaker after only three films: "Cimino occupies an important
position in today's cinema ... a man whose cinematic obsession it is to extract,
represent, and investigate those essential elements in the American psyche ..."
Frequent collaborator Mickey Rourke has often praised Cimino for his creativity
and dedication to work. On Heaven's Gate, Rourke has said, "I remember thinking
this little guy [Cimino] was so well organized. He had this huge production
going on all around him yet he could devote his absolute concentration on the
smallest of details."

Film director/screenwriter Quentin Tarantino has also expressed great admiration
and praise for Cimino's The Deer Hunter, especially with regards to the
Vietnamese POW Russian roulette sequence: "The Russian roulette sequence is just
out and out one of the best pieces of film ever made, ever shot, ever edited,
ever performed. ... Anybody can go off about Michael Cimino all they want but
when you get to that sequence you just have to shut up." Tarantino also loved
Cimino's Year of the Dragon and listed its climax as his favorite killer movie
moment in 2004.

Film director/screenwriter Oliver Stone, who collaborated with Cimino in Year of
the Dragon (1985), said of Cimino: "I have to admit I liked working with Michael
Cimino, and I learned a lot from him."

Cimino has been described by colleagues and critics as vain, self-indulgent,
egotistical, megalomaniacal and an enfant terrible. Producers and critics have
tended to be harsher on Cimino than his collaborators. Critics, for example,
Pauline Kael, John Simon and John Powers, have also noted and criticized these
qualities in many of the films he wrote and directed. Cimino was also known to
have given exaggerated, misleading and conflicting stories about himself, his
background and his filmmaking experiences.

In writing about his experience working on The Sicilian, producer Bruce McNall
described Cimino as "one part artistic genius and one part infantile egomaniac."
In his book, Blade Runners, Deer Hunters and Blowing the Bloody Doors Off,
producer Michael Deeley described his experience with Cimino on Deer Hunter as a
"travail", adding "the only flaw I find in my Oscar [for The Deer Hunter] is
that Cimino's name is also engraved on it." Deeley criticized Cimino for lack of
professional respect and standards: "Cimino was selfish. ... Selfishness, in
itself, is not necessarily a flaw in a director, unless it swells into ruthless
self-indulgence combined with a total disregard for the terms in which the
production has been set." Cinematographer Vilmos Zsigmond reported that Cimino
was hard to work with but extremely talented visually.

Movie critics Pauline Kael and John Simon criticized Cimino's abilities as a
filmmaker and storyteller. After his failure with Heaven's Gate, some
commentators joked and/or suggested that he should give back his Oscars for The
Deer Hunter. Pauline Kael in The New Yorker described Cimino's storytelling
abilities in her review of Year of the Dragon:

John Foote questioned whether or not Cimino deserved his Oscars for The Deer
Hunter: "It seemed in the spring of 1979, following the Oscar ceremony, there
was a sense in the industry that if the Academy could have taken back their
votes — which saw The Deer Hunter and director Michael Cimino winning for Best
Picture and Best Director — they would have done so."

Peter Biskind described Cimino in relation to The Deer Hunter as "our first,
home-grown fascist director, our own Leni Riefenstahl".

Cimino was known for giving exaggerated, misleading and conflicting (or simply
tongue-in-cheek) stories about himself, his background and his filmmaking
experiences. "When I'm kidding, I'm serious, and when I'm serious, I'm kidding,"
responded Cimino. "I am not who I am, and I am who I am not."

Cimino gave various dates for his birth, usually shaving a couple of years off
to seem younger, including February 3, 1943; November 16, 1943; and February 3,
1952. Many biographies about Cimino, such as the "Michael Cimino" entries in
David Thomson's The New Biographical Dictionary of Film and Ephraim Katz's Film
Encyclopedia, list his year of birth as 1943. In reference to Cimino's interview
with Leticia Kent on December 10, 1978, Steven Bach said, "Cimino wasn't
thirty-five but a few months shy of forty."

Cimino claimed he got his start in documentary films following his work in
academia and nearly completed a doctorate at Yale. Some of these details are
repeated in reviews of Cimino's films[a 5] or his official bios. Steven Bach
refuted those claims in his book Final Cut: "[Cimino] had done no work toward a
doctorate and he had become known in New York as a maker not of documentaries
but of sophisticated television commercials."

During the production of The Deer Hunter, Cimino had given co-workers (such as
cinematographer Vilmos Zsigmond and associate producer Joann Carelli) the
impression that much of the storyline was biographical, somehow related to the
director's own experience and based on the lives of men he had known during his
service in Vietnam. Just as the film was about to open, Cimino gave an interview
to The New York Times in which he claimed that he had been "attached to a Green
Beret medical unit" at the time of the Tet Offensive of 1968. When the Times
reporter, who had not been able to corroborate this, questioned the studio about
it, studio executives panicked and fabricated "evidence" to support the story.
Universal Studios president Thom Mount commented at the time, "I know this guy.
He was no more a medic in the Green Berets than I'm a rutabaga." Tom Buckley, a
veteran Vietnam correspondent for the Times, corroborated that Cimino had done a
stint as an Army medic, but that the director had never been attached to the
Green Berets. Cimino's active service – six months while a student at Yale in
1962 – had been as a reservist who was never deployed to Vietnam. Cimino's
publicist reportedly said that the filmmaker intended to sue Buckley, but Cimino
never did.

Cimino died July 2, 2016, at age 77 at his home in Beverly Hills, California.
Eric Weissmann, a friend and former lawyer of Cimino’s, said that friends had
been unable to reach Cimino by phone for the last few days and called the
police, who found him dead in his bed. Weissmann stated that he had not been
aware of Cimino having any illness. Coroner reports revealed he died of heart
failure.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wales_national_football_team

The Wales national football team (Welsh: Tîm pêl-droed cenedlaethol Cymru)
represents Wales in international football. It is controlled by the Football
Association of Wales (FAW), the governing body for football in Wales and the
third-oldest national football association in the world.

Although part of the United Kingdom, Wales has always had a representative side
that plays in major professional tournaments, though not in the Olympic Games,
as the IOC has always recognised United Kingdom representative sides.

During their history, Wales have qualified for two major international
tournaments. They reached the quarter-finals of the 1958 FIFA World Cup. They
reached the semi-finals of UEFA Euro 2016 after beating Belgium in the
quarter-final match on 1 July 2016. This was, therefore, the first time that
Wales had reached the semi-final of a major tournament. Wales also progressed
through UEFA Euro 1976 qualifying to the quarter-final, which was played on a
home and away leg basis but they did not feature in the finals tournament.

At all levels including the youth teams the Welsh national team draws players
primarily from clubs in the English football league system. The main
professional Welsh clubs play in the English leagues, with some full-time and
part-time professional clubs playing in the Welsh football league system.

Wales played its first competitive match on 25 March 1876 against Scotland in
Glasgow, making it the third oldest international football team in the world.
Although the Scots won the first fixture 4–0, a return match was planned in
Wales the following year, and so it was that the first international football
match on Welsh soil took place at The Racecourse Ground, Wrexham on 5 March
1877. Scotland took the spoils winning 2–0. Wales' first match against England
came in 1879 – a 2–1 defeat at the Kennington Oval, London and in 1882 Wales
faced Ireland for the first time, winning 7–1 in Wrexham.

The associations of the four Home Nations met in Manchester on 6 December 1882
to set down a set of worldwide rules. This meeting saw the establishment of the
International Football Association Board (IFAB) to approve changes to the rules,
a task the four associations still perform to this day. The 1883–84 season saw
the formation of the British Home Championship, a tournament which was played
annually between England, Scotland, Ireland and Wales, until 1983–84. Wales were
champions on 12 occasions, winning outright seven times whilst sharing the title
five times.

The FAW became members of FIFA, world football's governing body, in 1906, but
the relationship between FIFA and the British associations was fraught and the
British nations withdrew from FIFA in 1928 in a dispute over payments to amateur
players. As a result, Wales did not enter the first three World Cups. In 1932
Wales played host to the Republic of Ireland, the first time they played against
a side from outside the four home nations. A year later, Wales played a match
outside the United Kingdom for the first time when they travelled to Paris to
take on France in a match which was drawn 1–1. After World War II Wales, along
with the other three home nations, rejoined FIFA in 1946 and took part in the
qualifying rounds for the 1950 World Cup, the 1949–50 Home Championships being
designated as a qualifying group. The top two teams were to qualify for the
finals in Brazil, but Wales finished bottom of the group.

The 1950s were a golden age for Welsh football with stars such as Ivor
Allchurch, Cliff Jones, Alf Sherwood, Jack Kelsey, Trevor Ford, Ronnie Burgess,
Terry Medwin and John Charles.

Wales made its only World Cup finals tournament appearance in the 1958 FIFA
World Cup in Sweden. However, their path to qualification was unusual. Having
finished second to Czechoslovakia in qualifying Group 4 the golden generation of
Welsh football managed by Jimmy Murphy seemed to have missed out on
qualification but the politics of the Middle East subsequently intervened.

In the Asian/African qualifying zone Egypt and Sudan had refused to play against
Israel following the Suez crisis, whilst Indonesia had insisted on meeting
Israel on neutral ground. As a result, FIFA proclaimed Israel winners of their
respective group. However, FIFA did not want a team to qualify for the World Cup
finals without actually playing a match and so lots were drawn of all the second
placed teams in UEFA. Belgium were drawn out first but they refused to
participate and so then Wales was drawn out and awarded a two-legged play-off
match against Israel with a place in Sweden for the winners.

Having beaten Israel 2–0 at the Ramat Gan Stadium and 2–0 at Ninian Park,
Cardiff, Wales went through to a World Cup Finals tournament for the first and,
so far, only time.

The strong Welsh squad made their mark in Sweden, drawing all the matches in
their group against Hungary, Mexico and Sweden before defeating Hungary in a
play off match to reach the quarter-finals against Brazil. However, Wales'
chances of victory against Brazil were hampered by an injury to John Charles
that ruled him out of the match. Wales lost 1–0 with 17-year-old Pelé scoring
his first international goal. The goal made Pelé the youngest World Cup
goalscorer and Brazil went on to win the tournament.

Wales' remarkable campaign in Sweden was the subject of the best-selling book
When Pele Broke Our Hearts: Wales and the 1958 World Cup (by Mario Risoli, St
David's Press) which was published on the 40th anniversary of the World Cup and
was also the inspiration for a Bafta Cymru-nominated documentary.

Wales had never qualified for the finals tournament of the European
Championships since its inception in 1960. However, in 1976 the team managed by
Mike Smith reached the last eight of the competition, having finished top of
qualifying group 2 ahead of Hungary, Austria and Luxembourg. Prior to 1980 only
four countries qualified for the finals tournament and Wales were drawn to play
against the winners of group 3 Yugoslavia on a home and away basis match. Wales
lost the first leg 2–0 in Zagreb and were knocked out of the competition having
only managed a 1–1 draw in a bad-tempered return leg at Ninian Park, Cardiff
which was marred by crowd trouble. This led to Wales initially being banned from
the 1980 tournament, subsequently reduced on appeal to a ban on qualifying games
being played within 100 miles of Cardiff for four years. Yugoslavia went on to
finish 3rd in the 1980 tournament.

The following year Wales defeated England on English soil for the first time in
42 years and secured their only victory to date at Wembley thanks to a Leighton
James penalty. Another notable achievement came in the 1980 British Home
Championship, as Wales comprehensively defeated England at The Racecourse
Ground, Wrexham. Goals from Mickey Thomas, Ian Walsh, Leighton James and an own
goal by Phil Thompson saw Wales beat England 4–1 just four days after England
had beaten the then-world champions, Argentina.

In the 1982 World Cup qualifiers the Wales team managed by Mike England came
extremely close to qualification, a 3–0 defeat against the USSR in their final
game meant they missed out on goal difference, but the real damage had been done
by their failure to beat Iceland in their last home game, the match eventually
finishing 2–2 after several hold-ups due to floodlight failures.

Mark Hughes marked his debut for Wales by scoring the only goal of the game as
England were defeated once again in 1984. The following season, Hughes was again
on target, scoring a wonder goal as Wales thrashed Spain 3–0 at The Racecourse
during qualification for the 1986 World Cup. However, despite beating Scotland
1–0 at Hampden Park, it was again Iceland that wrecked Welsh hopes by beating
Wales 1–0 in Reykjavik and for the second World Cup in a row Wales missed out on
goal difference. Wales had to win their last match at home to Scotland to be
guaranteed at least a play-off, but were held to a 1–1 draw in a match marred by
the death of Scotland manager Jock Stein who collapsed from a heart attack at
the end of the game.

Under Terry Yorath Wales attained their highest FIFA ranking until then of 27th
in August 1993. Wales came close, once again, to qualifying for a major
championship when they came within a whisker of reaching the 1994 World Cup.
Needing to win the final game of the group at home to Romania, Paul Bodin missed
a penalty when the scores were level 1–1; the miss was immediately followed by
Romania taking the lead and going on to win 2–1.

Following the failure to qualify Yorath's contract as manager of the national
side was not renewed by the FAW and John Toshack, then manager of Real Sociedad,
was appointed as a part-time manager. However, Toshack resigned after just one
game – a 3–1 defeat to Norway – citing problems with the FAW as his reason for
leaving, although he was sure to have been shocked at being booed off the pitch
at Ninian Park by the Welsh fans still reeling from the dismissal of Yorath.
Mike Smith took the Wales manager role for the second time at the start of the
Euro 96 qualifiers but Wales slipped to embarrassing defeats against Moldova and
Georgia before Bobby Gould was appointed in June 1995.

Gould's time in charge of Wales is seen as a dark period by Welsh football fans.
His questionable tactics and public fallings-out with players Nathan Blake,
Robbie Savage and Mark Hughes[citation needed], coupled with embarrassing
defeats to club side Leyton Orient and a 7–1 thrashing by the Netherlands in
1996 did not make him a popular figure within Wales. Gould finally resigned
following a 4–0 defeat to Italy in 1999, and the FAW turned to two legends of
the national team, Neville Southall and Mark Hughes to take temporary charge of
the game against Denmark four days later, with Hughes later being appointed on a
permanent basis.

Under Mark Hughes, Wales came close to qualifying for a place at UEFA Euro 2004
in Portugal, being narrowly defeated by Russia in the play-offs. The defeat,
however, was not without its controversy as Russian midfield player, Yegor
Titov, tested positive for the use of a banned substance after the first
qualifying leg, a scoreless draw in Moscow. However, the sport's governing body
decided to take no action against the Football Union of Russia other than
instructing them not to play Titov again, and the Russian team went on to beat
Wales in Cardiff 1–0 to qualify for UEFA Euro 2004.

Following a disappointing start to 2006 FIFA World Cup qualification – UEFA
Group 6, Hughes left his role with the national team to take over as manager of
English Premier League outfit Blackburn Rovers. On 12 November 2004, John
Toshack was appointed manager for the second time.

In UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying, Wales were drawn in Group D alongside Germany, the
Czech Republic, Slovakia, Republic of Ireland, Cyprus and San Marino. The team's
performance was disappointing, finishing fifth in the group with expected defeat
at home to Germany yet an unexpected draw away, a loss away and a goalless draw
at home to the Czech Republic, a loss away and 2–2 draw at home to the Republic
of Ireland, a 3–0 home win and uninspiring 2–1 away win against minnows San
Marino, a 3–1 home win and 3–1 away defeat against Cyprus, and a spectacularly
mixed performance against Slovakia, losing 5–1 at home and winning 5–2 away.
However, better performances towards the end of the competition by a team
containing, of necessity because of injuries and suspensions of senior players,
no fewer than five players who were eligible for selection for the Under-21
squad was viewed as a hopeful sign of future progress for the team.

In 2010 FIFA World Cup qualification – UEFA Group 4, Wales made a promising
start, winning 1–0 and 2–0 against Azerbaijan and Liechtenstein, respectively.
However, they lost their next game against Russia in Moscow, 2–1, after Joe
Ledley had briefly drawn them level. The qualifying campaign showed signs of
promise when the team managed to prevent Germany from scoring for 74 minutes of
their match in Mönchengladbach, but the match eventually finished 1–0 to
Germany. Two 2–0 home defeats by Finland and Germany in Spring 2009 effectively
put paid to Wales' hopes of qualification.

Wales were drawn in UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying Group G with Montenegro, Bulgaria,
Switzerland and close rivals England. Wales lost 1–0 away to Montenegro in their
opening game and, on 9 September 2010, John Toshack stood down as manager after
being disappointed at previous results in 2010 against Croatia and the opening
UEFA Euro 2012 qualifier.

The Wales Under-21 coach Brian Flynn took over from Toshack as caretaker manager
with a view to a possible permanent appointment but a 1–0 home defeat to
Bulgaria and 4–1 away loss to Switzerland meant that the FAW passed over Flynn.

Gary Speed was appointed as permanent manager on 14 December 2010. Speed's first
game as Wales manager was 8 February 2011 in the inaugural Nations Cup, which
the Republic of Ireland won 3–0. Speed's first competitive match was the Euro
2012 qualifier at home to England 26 March 2011 and Speed appointed
twenty-year-old Aaron Ramsey captain, making Ramsey the youngest Wales captain.
Wales lost to England 2–0 and in August 2011 Wales attained their lowest ever
FIFA world ranking of 117th. This was followed by a 2–1 home win against
Montenegro, a 1–0 away loss to England, a 2–0 home win against Switzerland and a
1–0 away win against Bulgaria. Consequently, in October 2011, Wales had rapidly
risen to 45th in the FIFA rankings. A 4–1 home win in a friendly match versus
Norway on 12 November 2011 proved to be Speed's last match in charge of Wales.
The match was a culmination of Speed's efforts which led Wales to receive the
unofficial award for biggest mover of 2011 in the FIFA rankings. His tenure as
manager ended in tragic circumstances two weeks later when he was found dead at
his home on 27 November, having apparently committed suicide.

Due to London's successful bid for the 2012 Summer Olympics, a Great Britain
team would qualify as of right of being the host nation. However, the FAW
stressed it was strongly against the proposal. Despite this, Welsh players Aaron
Ramsey and Gareth Bale expressed their interest in representing the Great
Britain Olympic football team. Bale was ultimately omitted due to injury, but
Ramsey was joined by four other Welshmen in Stuart Pearce's 18-man squad;
Swansea City's Joe Allen and Neil Taylor. Manchester United's Ryan Giggs and
Liverpool's Craig Bellamy were also included as over-age players, with Giggs
being made captain.

Chris Coleman was appointed Wales team manager on 19 January 2012. For 2014 FIFA
World Cup qualification, Wales were drawn in Group A with Croatia, Serbia,
Belgium, Scotland and Macedonia. They lost their first game 2–0, against
Belgium. Their second game, against Serbia, was even worse – finishing 6–1 –
Wales's worst defeat since the 7–1 reversal to the Netherlands in 1996. In
October 2012, Ashley Williams was appointed captain of Wales by Coleman,
replacing Aaron Ramsey. Wales won at home against Scotland 2–1, lost away to
Croatia 2–0, and won away against Scotland 2–1 but a 2–1 loss at home to Croatia
ended Wales hopes of qualifying.

Wales were placed in Group B for qualifying for the UEFA Euro 2016 tournament
alongside Andorra, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cyprus and Israel. In July
2015, following four wins and two draws Wales topped the group.

In July 2015, having attained their then highest FIFA ranking of 10th, Wales
were placed among the top seeds for the 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification draw.
Wales were drawn in Group D with Austria, Serbia, Republic of Ireland, Moldova
and Georgia.

In September 2015, England dropped to 10th in the FIFA rankings making Wales in
ninth the highest ranked British team for the first time in history. In October
2015, Wales attained their highest ever FIFA ranking of 8th. On 10 October 2015,
Wales lost 2–0 to Bosnia and Herzegovina but on the same evening Wales'
qualification for the UEFA Euro 2016 tournament was confirmed after Cyprus beat
Israel.

Wales had qualified for UEFA Euro 2016 in France, their first European
Championship tournament, and were drawn into Group B with Slovakia, Russia and
England. On their Euro debut, on 11 June against Slovakia at the Nouveau Stade
de Bordeaux, Gareth Bale scored direct from a free kick to give Wales a 1–0
lead, and Hal Robson-Kanu scored the winner in a 2–1 victory that put them top
of the group. In their second game, against England in Lens, Wales led 1–0 at
halftime through another Bale free-kick, but lost 2–1. Against Russia at the
Stadium Municipal in Toulouse, Ramsey, Neil Taylor and Bale scored in a 3–0 win
that made them win the group.

In their Round of 16 match at the Parc des Princes in Paris, Wales played
Northern Ireland and won 1–0 after Bale's cross was put in as an own goal by
Gareth McAuley. In the quarter-final against Belgium, Wales, the last remaining
British team, went behind to a long-range effort from Radja Nainggolan, but
captain Ashley Williams headed an equaliser before Hal Robson-Kanu and Sam Vokes
confirmed a 3–1 victory for Wales. This victory advanced Wales to their first
major tournament semi-final and also made them the first British nation to
advance to the semi-finals of a major tournament since England did so at Euro
1996 as hosts.

The first half of the semi-final against Portugal in Lyon went goalless, but
goals from Cristiano Ronaldo and Nani early in the second half saw Portugal
claim a 2–0 win. Wales were welcomed back to Wales on 8 July with an open-top
bus parade around Cardiff, starting at Cardiff Castle and going past the
Millennium Stadium before finishing at the Cardiff City Stadium.

In September 2016 Wales opened their 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification campaign
with a comfortable 4–0 home win against Moldova. in October and November 2016
Wales drew 2–2 away to Austria, drew 1–1 at home to Georgia and drew 1-1 at home
to Serbia.

During the period 2000–2010, Wales played most of their home matches at the
Millennium Stadium, Cardiff. The stadium was built in 1999 on the site of the
old National Stadium, known as Cardiff Arms Park, as the Welsh Rugby Union (WRU)
had been chosen to host the 1999 Rugby World Cup. Prior to 1989, Wales played
their home games at the grounds of Cardiff City, Swansea City and Wrexham, but
then came to an agreement with the WRU to use Cardiff Arms Park and,
subsequently, the Millennium Stadium.

Wales' first football match at the Millennium Stadium was against Finland on 29
March 2000. The Finns won the match 2–1, with Jari Litmanen becoming the first
player to score a goal at the stadium. Ryan Giggs scored Wales' goal in the
match, becoming the first Welshman to score at the stadium.

With the opening of the Cardiff City Stadium in 2009, the FAW chose to stage
most home friendlies there, with other friendly matches played at the Liberty
Stadium in Swansea and the Racecourse Ground in Wrexham. Qualifying matches
continued to be played at the 74,500 capacity Millennium Stadium until the end
of 2009, which was typically only around 20–40% full amid poor team results.
This led to calls from fans and players for international matches to be held at
smaller stadiums. For the Euro 2012 qualifying campaign, the FAW decided Wales
would play all of their home ties at either the Cardiff City Stadium or the
Liberty Stadium, with the exception of the home tie against England, which was
played at the Millennium Stadium. The World Cup 2014 qualifying campaign saw
four home games at the Cardiff City Stadium and one at the Liberty Stadium.
Cardiff City Stadium's capacity was increased to 33,000 in 2014 and all home
matches for Euro 2016 qualifying were scheduled at the stadium and Wales
subsequently qualified for the finals tournament in France. The first of the
five home qualifiers for the 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA) were held
at the stadium, with the following two due to take place in September and
October 2017.

Wales squad to play Serbia on 12 November 2016. Caps and goals updated as 12
November 2016 after the match against Serbia. On 7 November 2016, Adam Matthews
was called up to the squad to replace Ben Davies who withdrew through injury. On
8 November 2016, Joe Walsh was called up to the squad to replace James Collins
who withdrew through injury.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canada_Day

Canada Day (French: Fête du Canada) is the national day of Canada. A federal
statutory holiday, it celebrates the anniversary of the July 1, 1867, enactment
of the Constitution Act, 1867 (then called the British North America Act, 1867),
which united the three separate colonies of the Canada, Nova Scotia, and New
Brunswick into a single Dominion within the British Empire called Canada.
Originally called Dominion Day (French: Le Jour de la Confédération), the
holiday was renamed in 1982, the year the Canada Act was passed. Canada Day
celebrations take place throughout the country, as well as in various locations
around the world, attended by Canadians living abroad.

Although Canada existed prior to 1867, within both the French and British
empires, Canada Day is frequently referred to as "Canada's birthday",
particularly in the popular press. This is a misnomer, as Canada Day is the
anniversary of only one important national milestone on the way to the country's
full independence, namely the joining on July 1, 1867, of the colonies of Nova
Scotia, New Brunswick, and Canada into a wider federation of four provinces (the
colony of Canada being divided into the provinces of Ontario and Quebec upon
Confederation). Canada became a kingdom within the British Empire in its own
right on that date, named the Dominion of Canada.[n 1] As a result, it gained an
increased level of self-governance, although the British parliament and Cabinet
still maintained political control over certain political areas, such as foreign
affairs, national defence, and constitutional changes. Canada gradually gained
increasing independence over the years until finally becoming completely
independent in 1982, when the Constitution Act, 1982, fully patriated the
Canadian constitution.

Under the federal Holidays Act, Canada Day is observed on July 1, unless that
date falls on a Sunday, in which case July 2 is the statutory holiday.
Celebratory events will generally still take place on July 1, even though it is
not the legal holiday. If it falls on a Saturday, any businesses normally closed
that day will usually dedicate the following Monday (July 3) as a day off.

Most communities across the country will host organized celebrations for Canada
Day, typically outdoor public events, such as parades, carnivals, festivals,
barbecues, air and maritime shows, fireworks, and free musical concerts, as well
as citizenship ceremonies. There is no standard mode of celebration for Canada
Day; Jennifer Welsh, a professor of International Relations at the University of
Oxford, said about this: "Canada Day, like the country, is endlessly
decentralized. There doesn't seem to be a central recipe for how to celebrate
it—chalk it up to the nature of the federation." However, the locus of the
celebrations is the national capital, Ottawa, Ontario, where large concerts and
cultural displays are held on Parliament Hill, with the governor general and
prime minister typically officiating, though the monarch or another member of
the Royal Family may also attend or take the governor general's place.[n 2]
Smaller events are mounted in other parks around the city and in Gatineau,
Quebec.

Given the federal nature of the anniversary, celebrating Canada Day can be a
cause of friction in the province of Quebec, where the holiday is overshadowed
by Quebec's National Holiday, on June 24. For example, the federal government
funds Canada Day events at the Old Port of Montreal—an area run by a federal
Crown corporation—while the National Holiday parade is a grassroots effort that
has been met with pressure to cease, even from federal officials. The nature of
the event has also been met with criticism outside of Quebec, such as that given
by Ottawa Citizen columnist David Warren, who said in 2007: "The Canada of the
government-funded paper flag-waving and painted faces—the 'new' Canada that is
celebrated each year on what is now called 'Canada Day'—has nothing
controversially Canadian about it. You could wave a different flag, and choose
another face paint, and nothing would be lost."

Canada Day also coincides with Quebec's Moving Day, when many fixed-lease
apartment rental terms expire. The bill changing the province's moving day from
May 1 to July 1 was introduced by a federalist member of the Quebec National
Assembly, Jérôme Choquette, in 1973, in order not to affect children still in
school in the month of May.

Canadian expatriates will often organize Canada Day activities in their local
area on or near the date of the holiday. Examples include Canada D'eh, an annual
celebration that takes place on June 30 in Hong Kong, at Lan Kwai Fong, where an
estimated attendance of 12,000 was reported in 2008; Canadian Forces' events on
bases in Afghanistan; and in Mexico, at the Royal Canadian Legion in Chapala,
and at the Canadian Club in Ajijic. In China, Canada Day celebrations are held
at the Bund Beach by the Canadian Chamber of Commerce in Shanghai.

The enactment of the British North America Act, 1867 (today called the
Constitution Act, 1867), which confederated Canada, was celebrated on July 1,
1867, with the ringing of the bells at the Cathedral Church of St. James in
Toronto and "bonfires, fireworks and illuminations, excursions, military
displays and musical and other entertainments", as described in contemporary
accounts. On June 20 of the following year, Governor General the Viscount Monck
issued a royal proclamation asking for Canadians to celebrate the anniversary of
Confederation, However, the holiday was not established statutorily until May
15, 1879, when it was designated as Dominion Day, alluding to the reference in
the British North America Act to the country as a dominion. The holiday was
initially not dominant in the national calendar; any celebrations were mounted
by local communities and the governor general hosted a party at Rideau Hall. No
larger celebrations were held until 1917 and then none again for a further
decade—the golden and diamond anniversaries of Confederation, respectively.

In 1946, Philéas Côté, a Quebec member of the House of Commons, introduced a
private member's bill to rename Dominion Day as Canada Day. The bill was passed
quickly by the lower chamber, but was stalled by the Senate, which returned it
to the commons with the recommendation that the holiday be renamed The National
Holiday of Canada, an amendment that effectively killed the bill.

Beginning in 1958, the Canadian government began to orchestrate Dominion Day
celebrations. That year, then Prime Minister John Diefenbaker requested that
Secretary of State Ellen Fairclough put together appropriate events, with a
budget of $14,000. Parliament was traditionally in session on July 1, but
Fairclough persuaded Diefenbaker and the rest of the federal Cabinet to attend.
Official celebrations thereafter consisted usually of Trooping the Colour
ceremonies on Parliament Hill in the afternoon and evening, followed by a mass
band concert and fireworks display. Fairclough, who became Minister of
Citizenship and Immigration, later expanded the bills to include performing folk
and ethnic groups. The day also became more casual and family oriented. Canada's
centennial in 1967 is often seen as an important milestone in the history of
Canadian nationalism and in Canada's maturing as a distinct, independent
country, after which Dominion Day became more popular with average Canadians.
Into the late 1960s, nationally televised, multi-cultural concerts held in
Ottawa were added and the fête became known as Festival Canada. After 1980, the
Canadian government began to promote celebrating Dominion Day beyond the
national capital, giving grants and aid to cities across the country to help
fund local activities.

Some Canadians were, by the early 1980s, informally referring to the holiday as
Canada Day,[n 3] a practice that caused some controversy: Proponents argued that
the name Dominion Day was a holdover from the colonial era, an argument given
some impetus by the patriation of the Canadian constitution in 1982, and others
asserted that an alternative was needed as the term does not translate well into
French. Conversely, numerous politicians, journalists, and authors, such as
Robertson Davies, decried the change at the time and some continue to maintain
that it was illegitimate and an unnecessary break with tradition. Others claimed
Dominion was widely misunderstood and conservatively inclined commenters saw the
change as part of a much larger attempt by Liberals to "re-brand" or re-define
Canadian history. Columnist Andrew Cohen called Canada Day a term of "crushing
banality" and criticized it as "a renunciation of the past [and] a misreading of
history, laden with political correctness and historical ignorance".

The holiday was officially renamed as a result of a private member's bill that
was passed through the House of Commons on July 9, 1982. Two years earlier, the
bill received third reading with only 12 Members of Parliament (MPs) present,
eight members less than the necessary quorum. However, according to
parliamentary rules, the quorum is enforceable only at the start of a sitting or
when a member calls attention to it. The group passed the bill in five minutes,
without debate, inspiring "grumblings about the underhandedness of the process".
It met with stronger resistance in the Senate. Ernest Manning argued that the
rationale for the change was based on a misperception of the name and George
McIlraith did not agree with the manner in which the bill was passed, urging the
government to proceed in a more "dignified way". However, the Senate did
eventually pass the bill, regardless. With the granting of Royal Assent, the
name was officially changed to Canada Day on October 27, 1982.

Since the name was changed, lobby groups and politicians have occasionally
campaigned to have it returned to Dominion Day. In 1996, Reform Party of Canada
MP Stephen Harper introduced a private member's bill to reinstate the name. It
was defeated. In 2012, Conservative MP Brad Trost made a speech in the House of
Commons advocating for the reinstatement of the Dominion Day name.

As the anniversary of Confederation, Dominion Day, and later Canada Day, was the
date set for a number of important events, such as the first national radio
network hookup by the Canadian National Railway (1927); the inauguration of the
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation's cross-country television broadcast, with
Governor General Vincent Massey's Dominion Day speech from Parliament Hill
(1958); the flooding of the Saint Lawrence Seaway (1958); the first colour
television transmission in Canada (1966); the inauguration of the Order of
Canada (1967); and the establishment of "O Canada" as the country's national
anthem (1980). Other events fell on the same day coincidentally, such as the
first day of the Battle of the Somme in 1916—shortly after which Newfoundland
recognized July 1 as Memorial Day to commemorate the Newfoundland Regiment's
heavy losses during the battle—and the enactment of the Chinese Immigration Act
in 1923—leading Chinese-Canadians to refer to July 1 as Humiliation Day and
boycott Dominion Day celebrations until the act was repealed in 1947.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2016_Summer_Olympics

The 2016 Summer Olympics (Portuguese: Jogos Olímpicos de Verão de 2016),[a]
officially known as the Games of the XXXI Olympiad and commonly known as Rio
2016, was a major international multi-sport event held in Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil, from 5 August to 21 August 2016.

More than 11,000 athletes from 205 National Olympic Committees, including first
time entrants Kosovo, South Sudan, and the Refugee Olympic Team, took part. With
306 sets of medals, the games featured 28 Olympic sports, including rugby sevens
and golf, which were added to the Olympic program in 2009. These sporting events
took place at 33 venues in the host city, and at five in São Paulo, Belo
Horizonte, Salvador, Brasília, and Manaus.

These were the first Summer Olympic Games under the International Olympic
Committee (IOC) presidency of Thomas Bach. The host city Rio de Janeiro was
announced at the 121st IOC Session in Copenhagen, Denmark, on 2 October 2009.
Rio became the first South American city to host the Summer Olympics. These were
the first games to be held in a Portuguese-speaking country, the first to be
held entirely in the host country's winter, the first since 1968 to be held in
Latin America, and the first since 2000 to be held in the Southern Hemisphere.

The lead-up to these Games was marked by controversies, including the
instability of the country's federal government; health and safety concerns
surrounding the Zika virus and significant pollution in the Guanabara Bay; and a
doping scandal involving Russia, which affected the participation of its
athletes in the Games.

The United States topped the medal table for the fifth time in the past six
Summer Olympics, winning the most golds (46) and most medals overall (121), as
well as its 1,000th Olympic gold medal overall. Great Britain finished second
and became the first country in the history of the modern Olympics to increase
its tally of medals in the subsequent games after being the host nation. China
finished third. Host country Brazil won seven gold medals, its most at any
single Summer Olympics, finishing in thirteenth place. Bahrain, Fiji, Jordan,
Kosovo, Puerto Rico, Singapore, Tajikistan, Ivory Coast and Vietnam each won
their first gold medals, as did the group of Independent Olympic Athletes (from
Kuwait).

The bidding process for the 2016 Olympic Games was officially launched on 16 May
2007. The first step for each city was to submit an initial application to the
International Olympic Committee (IOC) by 13 September 2007, confirming their
intention to bid. Completed official bid files, containing answers to a
25-question IOC form, were to be submitted by each applicant city by 14 January
2008. Four candidate cities were chosen for the shortlist on 4 June 2008:
Chicago, Madrid, Rio de Janeiro and Tokyo, which hosted the 1964 Summer Olympics
and will host again in 2020. The IOC did not promote Doha to the candidature
phase, despite scoring higher than selected candidate city Rio de Janeiro,
because of their intent of hosting the Olympics in October, outside of the IOC's
sporting calendar. Prague and Baku also failed to make the cut.

Nawal El Moutawakel of Morocco headed the 10-member Evaluation Commission,
having also chaired the evaluation commission for the 2012 Summer Olympics bids.
The commission made on-site inspections in the second quarter of 2009. They
issued a comprehensive technical appraisal for IOC members on 2 September, one
month before elections.

On 26 June 2011, it was reported on AroundTheRings.com that Roderlei Generali,
the COO of the Rio de Janeiro Organizing Committee for the Olympic Games,
resigned just one year after taking the job at ROOC. This comes just five months
after CCO Flávio Pestana quit for personal reasons. Pestana withdrew later
during the 2012 Summer Paralympics. Renato Ciuchin was then appointed as COO.

Events took place at eighteen existing venues, nine new venues constructed
specifically for the Games, and seven temporary venues.

Each event was held in one of four geographically segregated Olympic clusters:
Barra, Copacabana, Deodoro, and Maracanã. The same was done for the 2007 Pan
American Games. Several of the venues were located at the Barra Cluster Olympic
Park. Athletes could access their venues in shorter than 10 minutes and about 75
percent could do so in less than 25 minutes. Of the 34 competition locales,
eight have undergone permanent works, seven are limited, and nine are perpetual
legacy venues.

The largest venue at the games in terms of seating capacity was the 74,738-seat
Maracanã Stadium, which served as the ceremonies venue and site of the football
finals. The second largest stadium was the 60,000-seat Estádio Olímpico João
Havelange, which hosted track and field events.

The athletes' village was said to be the largest in Olympic history. Fittings
included about 80,000 chairs, 70,000 tables, 29,000 mattresses, 60,000 clothes
hangers, 6,000 television sets and 10,000 smartphones.

The Barra Olympic Park is a cluster of nine sporting venues in Barra da Tijuca,
in the west zone of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The site of the Olympic Park was
formerly occupied by the Autódromo Internacional Nelson Piquet, also known as
Jacarepaguá.

The nine venues within the Olympic Park are: Carioca Arena 1: basketball
(capacity: 16,000); Carioca Arena 2: wrestling, judo (capacity: 10,000); Carioca
Arena 3: fencing, taekwondo (capacity: 10,000); Future Arena: handball
(capacity: 12,000); Maria Lenk Aquatics Centre: diving, synchronised swimming,
water polo (capacity: 5,000); Olympic Aquatics Stadium: swimming, water polo
play-offs (capacity: 15,000); Olympic Tennis Centre: tennis (capacity: 10,000
Main Court); Rio Olympic Arena: gymnastics (capacity: 12,000); and Rio Olympic
Velodrome: track cycling (capacity: 5,000).

As well as the Estádio Olímpico João Havelange and Maracanã and in Rio de
Janeiro, football matches took place at 5 venues in the cities of São Paulo,
Belo Horizonte, Salvador, Brasília and Manaus.

Rio's historical downtown is undergoing a large-scale urban waterfront
revitalization project called Porto Maravilha. It covers 5 km2 (1.9 sq mi) in
area. The project aims to redevelop the port area, increasing the city center's
attractiveness and enhancing Rio's competitive position in the global economy.
The urban renovation involves: 700 km (430 mi) of public networks for water
supply, sanitation, drainage, electricity, gas and telecom; 4 km (2.5 mi) of
tunnels; 70 km (43 mi) of roads; 650 km2 (250 sq mi) of sidewalks; 17 km (11 mi)
of bike path; 15,000 trees; three sanitation treatment plants. As part of this
renovation, a new tram was built from the Santos Dumont Airport to Rodoviária
Novo Rio. It was due to open in April 2016.

The Games required more than 200 kilometres of security fencing. A 15,000 square
metre warehouse in Barra da Tijuca in western Rio was used to assemble and
supply the furniture and fittings for the Olympic Village. A second warehouse of
90,000 square metres, located in Duque de Caxias near the roads that provide
access to the venues, contained all the equipment needed for the sporting
events.

The medal design was unveiled on 15 June 2016; they were produced by the Casa da
Moeda do Brasil. The bronze and silver medals contained 30% recycled materials,
while the gold medals were produced using gold that had been mined and extracted
using means that met a series of sustainability criteria, such as being
extracted without the use of mercury. The medals feature a wreath design, while
the obverse, as is traditional, features Nike, the Greek goddess of victory.
They were accompanied by a wooden carrying box, while medallists also received a
trophy of the Games' emblem.

As an aspect of its bid, Rio's organizing committee committed to a focus on
sustainability and environmental protection as a theme of these Games, going on
to dub them a "Green Games for a Blue Planet". Organizers intended to, as legacy
projects, introduce a wider array of public transport options, upgrade the
infrastructure of the favelas to provide improved transport and access to
utilities, upgrade Rio's sewer system in order to remediate the level of
pollution in the Guanabara Bay. and plant 24 million seedlings to offset the
expected carbon emissions of the Games. However, some of these projects were met
with delays or faced with economic shortfalls, which led some critics to believe
that Rio would not be able to accomplish them.

The focus on environmental protection also influenced the implementation of
certain Olympic protocols: the Olympic cauldron was designed to be smaller than
previous iterations in order to reduce emissions, and utilizes a kinetic
sculpture to enhance its appearance in lieu of a larger body of flames. The
bronze and silver medals, as well as ribbons on all medals, incorporate recycled
materials, and athletes were not presented with flowers during medal ceremonies,
as had been traditionally done at prior Olympics (although flowers were still
used as part of the staging of medal presentations). Organizers considered the
practice to be wasteful since they were often thrown away, and "would struggle
to survive in the tropical Brazilian climate" if kept. The podiums were also
designed so that their materials could be recycled to make furniture. The Future
Arena, host of handball competitions, was designed as a modular temporary venue
whose components can be reconstructed to build schools.

Portions of the opening ceremony were also dedicated to the issue of climate
change.

The Olympic flame was lit at the temple of Hera in Olympia on 21 April 2016, the
traditional start of the Greek phase of the torch relay. On 27 April the flame
was handed over to the Brazilian organizers at a ceremony at the Panathenaic
Stadium in Athens. A brief stop was made in Switzerland to visit the IOC
headquarters and the Olympic Museum in Lausanne as well as the United Nations
Office at Geneva.

The torch relay began its Brazilian journey on 3 May at the capital Brasília.
The torch relay visited more than 300 Brazilian cities (including all the 26
states capitals and the Brazilian Federal District), with the last part held in
the city of Rio de Janeiro, lighting the cauldron during the 2016 Summer
Olympics opening ceremony on 5 August.

Unpaid volunteers performed a variety of tasks before and during the Games. A
target of 50,000 volunteers was set as early as 2012. When recruitment took
place in 2014, over 240,000 applications were received. The volunteers wore
clothing which included yellow polo shirts and jackets, beige trousers, white
socks and green trainers which they collected from the Uniform Distribution and
Accreditation Centre. But many volunteers have stopped to due long working hours
and one free meal a day. Volunteers also wore photo accreditation badges which
were also worn by officials, athletes, family members and media which gain them
access to specific venues and buildings around the site.

The ticket prices were announced on 16 September 2014, all of which were sold in
Brazilian reais (BRL). A total of 7.5 million tickets were to be sold in total,
with ticket prices ranging from BRL 40 for many events to BRL 4,600 for the most
expensive seats at the opening ceremony. About 3.8 million of these tickets were
available for BRL 70 or less.

The opening ceremony took place in the Maracana Stadium on 5 August 2016, and
was directed by Fernando Meirelles, Daniela Thomas and Andrucha Waddington. The
ceremony highlighted aspects of Brazilian history and culture, and featured a
segment narrated by Fernanda Montenegro and Judi Dench with an appeal to
environmental conservation and preventing global warming. The ceremony also
featured the inaugural presentation of the Olympic Laurel, an honour bestowed by
the IOC to those that have made "significant achievements in education, culture,
development and peace through sport", to Kipchoge "Kip" Keino. The Games were
officially opened by Acting President of Brazil Michel Temer.

The Olympic cauldron was lit by Vanderlei Cordeiro de Lima, the men's marathon
bronze medallist at the 2004 Summer Olympics who was also awarded the Pierre de
Coubertin medal for sportsmanship by the IOC after being attacked by a spectator
and losing his lead. The cauldron was originally expected to be lit by Brazilian
footballer Pelé, but he declined to participate due to health problems. A public
cauldron was lit in front of the Candelária Church by a 14-year-old participant
in Rio's Vila Olimpica program—which provides access to training facilities to
disadvantaged youth.

In April 2008, the IOC began accepting applications for two new sports to be
introduced to the Olympic programme, which included baseball and softball (which
were dropped in 2005), karate, squash, golf, roller sports, and rugby union all
applied to be included. Formal presentations were held for the IOC executive
board in June 2009. In August, the executive board initially gave its approval
to rugby sevens—a seven-player version of rugby union—by a majority vote, thus
removing baseball, roller sports, and squash from contention. Among the
remaining three—golf, karate, and softball—the board approved golf as a result
of consultation. The final decision regarding the remaining two sports was made
on 9 October 2009, the final day of the 121st IOC Session. A new system was in
place at this session; a sport now needed only a simple majority from the full
IOC committee for approval rather than the two-thirds majority previously
required.

The International Sailing Federation announced in May 2012 that windsurfing
would be replaced at the 2016 Olympics by kitesurfing, but this decision was
reversed in November. The IOC announced in January 2013 that it would review the
status of cycling events, following Lance Armstrong's admission of using
performance-enhancing drugs and accusations that cycling's governing body had
covered up doping.

All 206 National Olympic Committees have qualified at least one
athlete.[citation needed] The first three nations to qualify athletes for the
Games were Germany, Great Britain, and the Netherlands who each qualified four
athletes for the team dressage by winning medals in the team event at the 2014
FEI World Equestrian Games.

As host nation, Brazil has received automatic entry for some sports including in
all cycling disciplines and six places for weightlifting events. The 2016 Summer
Olympics are the first games in which Kosovo and South Sudan are eligible to
participate. Bulgarian and Russian weightlifters were banned from Rio Olympics
for numerous anti-doping violations.

Kuwait was banned in October 2015 for the second time in five years over
government interference in the country's Olympic committee.

Due to the European migrant crisis and other reasons, the International Olympic
Committee (IOC) allowed athletes to compete as Independent Olympians under the
Olympic Flag. In the previous Olympic Games, refugees were ineligible to compete
because of their inability to represent their home NOCs. On 2 March 2016, the
IOC finalized plans for a specific Refugee Olympic Team (ROT); out of 43 refugee
athletes deemed potentially eligible, 10 were chosen to form the team.

In November 2015, Russia was provisionally suspended from all international
track and field athletic competitions by the International Association of
Athletics Federations (IAAF) following a World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) report
into a doping program in the country. The IAAF announced that it would allow
individual Russian athletes to apply for "exceptional eligibility" to
participate in the Games as "neutral" athletes, if it were independently
verified that they had not engaged in doping nor in the Russian doping program.

On 24 July 2016, the IOC rejected the IAAF and WADA's recommendations to allow
clean athletes to compete neutrally, stating that the Olympic Charter "does not
foresee such 'neutral athletes'" and that it was up to each country's National
Olympic Committee to decide which athletes would be competing.

During the Games some countries and continents had a national house. These
temporary meeting places for supporters, athletes and other followers were
located throughout Rio de Janeiro.

This is currently based on the schedule released on the same day as ticket sales
began, 31 March 2015.

The top ten listed NOCs by number of gold medals are listed below. Host nation
Brazil finished in 13th place with a total of 19 medals (7 gold, 6 silver, and 6
bronze).

To sort this table by nation, total medal count, or any other column, click on
the icon next to the column title.

* Host nation (Brazil) (Brazil is ranked at #13. See the complete medals table
at 2016 Summer Olympics medal table.)

A number of events, most notably in aquatics, beach volleyball, and track and
field, were scheduled with sessions and matches occurring as late as 22:00 to
00:00 BRT. These scheduling practices were influenced primarily by United States
broadcast rightsholder NBC (due to the substantial fees NBC has paid for rights
to the Olympics, the IOC has sometimes allowed NBC to have influence on event
scheduling to maximize U.S. television ratings when possible), as well as the
main Brazilian rightsholder Rede Globo. As Brasília time is only one hour ahead
of the U.S. Eastern Time Zone, certain marquee events were scheduled so they
could occur during the lucrative U.S. primetime hours (traditionally 20:00 to
23:00 ET, or 21:00 to 00:00 BRT), allowing them to be broadcast live on the U.S.
east coast as opposed to being delayed. This practice was also to the benefit
Rede Globo, which elected to not preempt its widely viewed lineup of primetime
schedule for the Games. However, Rede Globo never changes its primetime
programming to prioritize its telenovelas. But even so, sometimes the
broadcaster has canceled its normal schedule to broadcast the main events of the
Games. But even so, the station in a few days canceled the broadcast of
primetime schedule for the transmission of some major events such as ceremonies,
volleyball and football games and some athletics finals..

The closing ceremony of the 2016 Summer Olympics was held on 21 August 2016 from
20:00 to 22:50 BRT at the Maracanã Stadium. As per traditional Olympic protocol,
the ceremony featured cultural presentations from both the current (Brazil) and
following (Japan) host countries, as well as closing remarks by International
Olympic Committee (IOC) president Thomas Bach and the leader of the Games'
organizing committee Carlos Arthur Nuzman, the official handover of the Olympic
flag from Rio de Janeiro mayor Eduardo Paes to Tokyo governor Yuriko Koike,
whose city will host the 2020 Summer Olympics, and the extinguishing of the
Olympic flame.

The creative director for the ceremony was Rosa Magalhães. Amid heavy rainfall,
the ceremony began with interpretive dancers representing various landmarks in
the host city. Martinho da Vila then performed a rendition of the classic song
"Carinhoso (pt)" by Pixinguinha. In another segment, introducing the athletes,
pop singer Roberta Sá channeled Carmen Miranda, the fruit-headdress-wearing,
midcentury Hollywood diva who endures as a beloved camp figure. The Parade of
Flags followed shortly after a choir of 27 children, representing the states of
Brazil, sang the Brazilian national anthem.

The Oxford Olympics Study 2016 estimates the outturn cost of the Rio 2016 Summer
Olympics at USD 4.6 billion in 2015-dollars. This includes sports-related costs,
that is, (i) operational costs incurred by the organizing committee for the
purpose of staging the Games, of which the largest components are technology,
transportation, workforce, and administration costs, while other operational
costs include security, catering, ceremonies, and medical services, and (ii)
direct capital costs incurred by the host city and country or private investors
to build the competition venues, the Olympic village, international broadcast
center, and media and press center, which are required to host the Games.
Indirect capital costs are not included, such as for road, rail, or airport
infrastructure, or for hotel upgrades or other business investment incurred in
preparation for the Games but not directly related to staging the Games. The Rio
Olympics' cost of USD 4.6 billion compares with costs of USD 15 billion for
London 2012 and USD 6.8 billion for Beijing 2008. Average cost for the Summer
Games since 1960 is USD 5.2 billion.

Olympic Broadcasting Services served as the host broadcaster for these Games;
produced from a total of 7 mobile units, OBS distributed 40,000 hours of
television footage and 60,000 hours of digital footage of the Games to its
international rightsholders; for the first time in Olympic history,
digital-oriented footage exceeded the amount of television-oriented footage. The
International Broadcast Centre was constructed in the Barra da Tijuca cluster.
NHK and OBS once again filmed portions of the Games, including the opening
ceremony and selected events, in 8K resolution video. Additionally, expanding
upon a 180-degree trial at the 2016 Winter Youth Olympics, 85 hours of video
content were originated in 360-degree virtual reality formats. In the United
States, NBC offered 4K content, downconverted from the 8K footage and with HDR
and Dolby Atmos support, to participating television providers. Owing to their
expertise in domestic broadcasts of the new sports introduced in Rio, NBC and
Sky New Zealand staff handled the production of the golf and rugby sevens events
on behalf of OBS.

In August 2009, the IOC reached a deal to sell domestic broadcast rights to the
2016 Summer Olympics to Grupo Globo. Replacing Record TV the deal covers
free-to-air coverage on Rede Globo, pay TV, and digital rights to the Games. In
turn, Globo sub-licensed partial free-to-air rights to Rede Record, along with
Rede Bandeirantes. IOC board member Richard Carrión described the agreement as
"unprecedented", touting that "by working with Brazil's leading media
organizations, we are confident that this represents a great deal for Olympic
fans in the region. There will be a huge increase in the amount of Olympic
action broadcast, both during and outside Games time, and Brazilians will have
more choice of how, when and where they follow their Olympic Games."

The official mascots of the 2016 Summer Olympics and Paralympics were unveiled
on 24 November 2014. They were created by Sao Paulo-based animation company
Birdo. The Olympic mascot Vinicius, named after musician Vinicius de Moraes,
represents Brazilian wildlife and carries design traits of cats, monkeys, and
birds. According to their fictional backgrounds, the mascots "were both born
from the joy of Brazilians after it was announced that Rio would host the
Games." Brand director Beth Lula stated that the mascots are intended to reflect
the diversity of Brazil's culture and people. The names of the mascots were
determined by a public vote whose results were announced on 14 December 2014;
the names, which reference the co-writers of the song "The Girl from Ipanema",
won over two other sets of names, tallying 44 percent of 323,327 votes. At the
Olympic wrestling events, coaches were given plush dolls of Vinicius to throw
into the ring when they wished to challenge a referee's call.

The official emblem for the 2016 Summer Olympics was designed by the Brazilian
agency Tatíl Design and unveiled on 31 December 2010, winning in a competition
against 139 agencies. The logo represents three figures joined at their arms and
feet, with the overall shape reflecting that of Sugarloaf Mountain. The emblem
was also designed to have a three-dimensional form, which designer Fred Gelli
claimed made it the "first 3D logo in the history of the Olympics."

The logo has been noted as evoking Henri Matisse's painting Dance. There were
also allegations by the Colorado-based Telluride Foundation that the logo had
been plagiarized from its own. While also consisting of several figures linked
in motion, the Telluride Foundation logo contains four figures. This is not the
first time that the foundation had alleged plagiarism of its logo by a Brazilian
event; in 2004, the linked figures element had been copied for the logo of
Carnival celebrations in Salvador. Gelli defended the allegations, stating that
the concept of figures linked in embrace was not inherently original as it was
"an ancient reference" and "in the collective unconscious". Gelli cited Dance as
an influence of the logo's concept, and stated that the designers had
intentionally aimed to make the interpretation of the concept as dissimilar to
others as possible.

An ongoing outbreak of the mosquito-borne Zika virus in Brazil raised fears
regarding its potential impact on athletes and visitors. To prevent puddles of
stagnant water that allow mosquitoes to breed, organizers announced plans to
perform daily inspections of Olympic venues. Zika virus transmission was also
attributed to inefficient sewage treatment in the area—an issue that was also in
the process of being addressed for the Games. In May 2016, a group of 150
physicians and scientists sent an open letter to the World Health Organization,
calling upon them to, according to co-author Arthur Caplan, have "an open,
transparent discussion of the risks of holding the Olympics as planned in
Brazil". The WHO dismissed the request, stating that "cancelling or changing the
location of the 2016 Olympics will not significantly alter the international
spread of Zika virus", and that there was "no public health justification" for
postponing them. Some athletes did not attend the Games because of the epidemic.
On 2 September 2016, the World Health Organization reported that there were no
confirmed cases of Zika among athletes or visitors during the Olympics.

The Guanabara Bay, whose waters were used for sailing and windsurfing
competitions, is heavily polluted. Among the chief causes of the pollution are
uncollected trash fed into the bay via polluted rivers and slums along the
coast. Pollution of the Guanabara has been a long-term issue. Officials promised
at the Earth Summit in 1992 that they would begin to address the pollution but
previous attempts to do so have been insufficient. As an aspect of their bid for
the Games, Rio once again committed to making efforts towards cleaning the bay.
However, some of these proposed initiatives have faced budgetary issues. Prior
to these efforts, only 17% of Rio's sewage was treated; this raw sewage also
leaked into the bay. Although Mayor of Rio Eduardo Paes stated that the city may
not be able to reach its goal of having 80% of sewage treated, at least 60% of
sewage was treated by March 2016, with a projected goal of 65% of sewage being
treated by the time the Olympics started.

In 2014, Operation Car Wash, an investigation by the Federal Police of Brazil,
uncovered unprecedented money laundering and corruption at the state-controlled
oil company Petrobras. In early 2015, a series of protests against alleged
corruption by the government of President Dilma Rousseff began in Brazil,
triggered by revelations that numerous politicians were involved in the
Petrobras affair. By early 2016, the scandal had escalated into a full-blown
political crisis affecting not only President Rousseff, but also former
President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, resulting in massive demonstrations all
over the country involving millions of protesters, both anti and pro-Rousseff.
At the same time, Brazil faced its worst economic recession since the 1990s,
raising questions about whether the country was adequately prepared for the
Games against a volatile political and economic backdrop. On 12 May, President
Rousseff was stripped of her powers and duties for 180 days, after an
impeachment vote in the Federal Senate, thus Vice President Michel Temer acted
as acting president during the Games.

Rio's crime problems also received renewed attention after it was awarded the
Games; Mayor Paes stated that the city was facing "big issues" in heightening
security, but that such concerns and issues were presented to the IOC throughout
the bidding process. The governor of the state of Rio de Janeiro also
highlighted the fact that London faced security problems, with a terrorist
attack occurring just one day after it was awarded the 2012 Summer Olympics. The
estimate was that 5,000 men of the National Public Security Force and 22,000
military officers (14,800 Army; 5,900 Navy and 1,300 of the Brazilian Air
Force), in addition to the fixed quota of Rio January, would act during the
Olympic Games. On 21 July 2016, two weeks before the scheduled start of the
Games, the Brazilian Federal Police broke up an Islamic jihadist terrorist ring
by arresting 12 people.

While the whole city underwent major infrastructure improvements, there were
concerns that some of the projects would never materialise. On 21 April—the day
that the Olympic torch was lit—a 50 metres (164 ft) section of the Tim Maia bike
path, crossing the Oscar Niemeyer Avenue in São Conrado neighborhood and a part
of the legacy of the games, was hit by a giant wave and collapsed, causing the
death of two pedestrians and injuries to three more. The athlete's village has
been described as the largest in Olympic history, but two weeks before the
Olympics opened, officials also described it as "unliveable" and unsafe because
of major plumbing and electrical hazards, blocked toilets, leaking pipes,
exposed wiring, darkened stairwells where no lighting has been installed, and
dirty floors. More than 500 employees of the local Olympic committee worked to
fix the problems reported by the delegations.

In November 2015, Russia's track and field team was provisionally suspended from
all international athletic competitions by the International Association of
Athletics Federations (IAAF) following a World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) report
into a doping program in the country. On 18 July 2016, an independent
investigation commissioned by WADA reported that Russia's Ministry of Sport and
Federal Security Service had operated a "state-dictated" system to implement an
extensive doping program and to cover up positive samples. Based on the finding
the International Olympic Committee called for an emergency meeting to consider
banning Russia from the Summer Olympics. The IOC decided against completely
banning Russian participation and instead decided to set additional, stricter
requirements for all Russian participants entered into the Olympic Games.
Originally Russia submitted a list of 389 athletes for competition. On 7 August
2016, the IOC cleared 278 athletes, while 111 were removed because of the
scandal.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zlatan_Ibrahimovi%C4%87

Zlatan Ibrahimović (Swedish pronunciation: [ˈslaːtan ɪbraˈhiːmɔvɪtɕ] ( listen),
Bosnian: [zlǎtan ibraxǐːmoʋitɕ] ( listen); born 3 October 1981) is a Swedish
professional footballer who plays as a forward for Manchester United. He was
also a member of the Sweden national team, making his senior international debut
in 2001 and serving as captain from 2010 until he retired from international
football in 2016. Primarily a striker, he is a prolific goalscorer, who is best
known for his technique, creativity, strength, ability in the air, and his
powerful and accurate striking ability. As of February 2017, he is the second
most decorated active footballer in the world, having won 32 trophies in his
career.

Ibrahimović began his career at Malmö FF in the late 1990s before being signed
by Ajax, where he made a name for himself. He signed for Juventus and excelled
in Serie A in a strike partnership with David Trezeguet. In 2006, he signed for
rival side Internazionale and was named to the UEFA Team of the Year in both
2007 and 2009. In addition, Ibrahimović would finish as the league's top scorer
in 2008–09 and win three straight Scudetti. In the summer of 2009, he
transferred to Barcelona, before moving back to Serie A football the following
season, joining Milan in a deal that made him one of the highest-paid players in
the world. He won another Scudetto with Milan in the 2010–2011 season. He joined
Paris Saint-Germain in July 2012. During his four-season stay at PSG,
Ibrahimović won four consecutive Ligue 1 titles, three Coupes de la Ligue, two
Coupes de France and was the top scorer in Ligue 1 for three seasons. In October
2015, he became PSG's all time leading goalscorer. He finished his PSG career
with 156 goals in 180 competitive matches.

Ibrahimović is one of ten players to have made 100 or more appearances for the
Swedish national team. He is the country's all-time leading goalscorer with 62
goals. He represented Sweden at the 2002 and 2006 FIFA World Cups, as well as
the 2004, 2008, 2012, and 2016 UEFA European Championships. He has been awarded
Guldbollen (the Golden Ball), given to the Swedish player of the year, a record
11 times, including 10 consecutive times from 2007 to 2016.

With his playing style and acrobatic finishing compared to Dutch retired striker
Marco van Basten, Ibrahimović is widely regarded as one of the best strikers in
the game and one of the best footballers of his generation. His spectacular
bicycle kick for Sweden against England won the 2013 FIFA Puskás Award for Goal
of the Year. Off the field, he is known for his brash persona and outspoken
comments, in addition to referring to himself in the third person. In December
2013, Ibrahimović was ranked by The Guardian as the third-best player in the
world, behind only Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo. In December 2014, Swedish
newspaper Dagens Nyheter named him the second-greatest Swedish sportsperson of
all time, after tennis player Björn Borg.

Ibrahimović was born in Sweden to a Muslim Bosniak father, Šefik Ibrahimović,
who emigrated to Sweden in 1977, and a Croatian Catholic mother, Jurka Gravić,
who had also emigrated to Sweden, where the couple first met. His father was
born in Bijeljina, Bosnia, and his mother was born in the village of Prkos near
Škabrnja in Croatia's Zadar County.

After receiving a pair of football boots, Ibrahimović began playing at the age
of six, alternating between local junior clubs Malmö BI and FBK Balkan. While in
his early teens, he was a regular for his hometown club Malmö FF. At the age of
15, Ibrahimović was close to quitting his football career, in favour of working
at the docks in Malmö, but his manager convinced him to continue playing. His
idol was Brazilian star Ronaldo when he was growing up.

Ibrahimović signed his first contract with Malmö in 1996, and moved up to the
senior side for the 1999 season of Allsvenskan, Sweden's top-flight league. That
season, Malmö finished 13th in the league and were relegated to the second
division, but returned to the top flight the next season. Arsène Wenger
unsuccessfully tried to persuade Ibrahimović to join Arsenal, while Leo
Beenhakker (the technical director of Ajax) also expressed interest in the
player after watching him in a friendly against Norwegian side Moss FK. On 22
March 2001, a deal between Ajax and Malmö regarding Ibrahimović's transfer to
Amsterdam was announced, and in July, Ibrahimović officially joined Ajax for
80 million Swedish kronor (€8.7 million).

Ibrahimović received little playing time under manager Co Adriaanse, but when
Adriaanse was sacked on 29 November 2001, new coach Ronald Koeman inserted
Ibrahimović into the starting lineup as Ajax won the 2001–02 Eredivisie title.
The next season, Ibrahimović scored twice in a 2–1 victory over French champions
Lyon in his Champions League debut on 17 September 2002. He scored five
Champions League goals overall as Ajax fell to Milan in the quarter-finals. In
his final season with Ajax, Ibrahimović's profile rose when he scored a goal
against NAC on 22 August 2004 that was eventually voted the "Goal of the Year"
by Eurosport viewers.

On 18 August 2004, during an international match against the Netherlands,
Ibrahimović injured Ajax teammate Rafael van der Vaart, who later accused
Ibrahimović of hurting him intentionally. This led to Ibrahimović's sudden sale
to Juventus on 31 August.

Ibrahimović moved from Ajax to Juventus for €16 million. He was promptly
inserted into the starting eleven due in part to top scorer David Trezeguet's
injury problems, and scored 16 goals. Near the end of the season, Juventus
reportedly rejected a €70 million bid for him from Real Madrid, which was later
revealed to be a publicity stunt initiated by Ibrahimović's agent, Mino Raiola,
in order to increase his market value. On 14 November 2005, he was awarded the
Guldbollen, a prize awarded to the best Swedish footballer of the year.

The following season was poor compared to his first season; his role in
Juventus' attack changed, as he became less of a goalscorer and moved more to
the sidelines, taking much part in the build-up play, especially as a target
player, and his assist numbers increased. In the 2005–06 season, Juventus fans
often got frustrated with him due to his anonymous presence in certain important
games such as the Champions League defeat to Arsenal. Juventus were stripped of
their last two Scudetti as part of the verdict from the Calciopoli scandal, and
were relegated to Serie B. The new staff tried to persuade Ibrahimović and other
top players to stay with Juventus, but the player and his agent were adamant to
move on, with Raiola threatening legal action in order to extricate Ibrahimović
from his contract.

On 10 August 2006, Ibrahimović completed a €24.8 million move to Internazionale,
signing a four-year-deal, this coming only a few days after 30-year-old
midfielder Patrick Vieira had completed his own transfer from Juve to the
Nerazzurri. Ibrahimović revealed that he had supported Inter when he was young.

Ibrahimović made his debut for Inter on 26 August 2006 against Roma in the 2006
Supercoppa Italiana, playing the full 90 minutes as Inter won after extra time.
He scored in his Serie A debut against Fiorentina on 9 September as Inter
commenced the league with a 3–2 win at Stadio Artemio Franchi. Three days later,
in his first Champions League appearance for Inter, Ibrahimović was not able to
avoid the 1–0 away defeat to Sporting CP as Inter begun their European campaign
in the wrong way. Later, on 28 October, in his first "Derby della Madonnina"
match against cross-town rivals Milan, Ibrahimović scored the third Inter goal
of the match and also his third league goal of the season in a 4–3 thriller win.
In his first season at the club, Ibrahimović top scored for Inter in Serie A
with 15 goals, as the team won the Scudetto with a record 97 points.

Ibrahimović played his 100th Serie A match on 16 September 2007 at the San Siro
against Catania, where he appeared as a second-half substitute for Hernán Crespo
in an eventual 2–0 win. In 2007, he signed a new contract until June 2013; it
was reported that this contract had made him the world's highest paid
footballer. On 18 May 2008, Ibrahimović scored both goals in a 2–0 defeat of
Parma on the final day of the 2007–08 Serie A season to give Inter a second
consecutive Scudetto. Overall, he scored 17 goals in 26 league matches, and was
named both Serie A Footballer of the Year and Serie A Foreign Footballer of the
Year.

Ibrahimović started his third Inter season by winning the Supercoppa Italiana
against Roma. After the regular and extra time had finished in a draw, the match
went to a penalty shootout where he successfully converted his penalty attempt.
He scored his team's only goal in the 2008–09 Serie A opening match against
Sampdoria, which finished in a 1–1 draw. On 4 October, during the match against
Bologna at home which Inter won 2–1, Ibrahimović scored a sensational goal,
stunning Francesco Antonioli with an irresistible backheeled shot from Adriano's
left-wing cross. The goal was later voted Goal of the Year in Serie A. On 19
October 2008, Ibrahimović continued with his solid performances by scoring twice
in an impressive 4–0 win at Roma, taking his tally up to five league goals. He
then scored another double in the Matchday 12 win against Palermo to help Inter
take the lead in the Serie A table by one point. In the next fixture,
Ibrahimović provided the assist on the only goal in the Derby d'Italia match
against Juventus at home, helping Inter to extend their league lead.

Ibrahimović ended the 2008–09 Serie A season as the league's top goalscorer with
25 goals, helping Inter to another league title. He was also named both
Footballer of the Year and Foreign Footballer of the Year for the second
consecutive season.

After Inter teammate Maxwell completed his transfer to Barcelona, Barça
president Joan Laporta confirmed that there was an agreement in principle
between Barcelona and Inter for Ibrahimović to join the club in exchange for
striker Samuel Eto'o, plus a reported fee of £59 million. Ibrahimović left Inter
during their United States summer tour in the World Football Challenge on 23
July 2009 for negotiations with Barcelona, with his last match for Inter being
against Chelsea. After Inter agreed terms with Eto'o and Barcelona with
Ibrahimović, Barcelona announced Ibrahimović would arrive on 26 July 2009 and
undergo a medical test on 27 July 2009.

Ibrahimović passed his medical and was presented to a crowd of over 60,000 at
Camp Nou. He signed a five-year contract, for €46 million and the exchange of
Eto'o (valued at €20 million) and loan of Alexander Hleb (with an option to
purchase for a €10 million fee), with a €250 million release clause, making
Ibrahimović worth €66 million. The Hleb deal, however, collapsed. Eventually,
Ibrahimović cost Barcelona €69.884 million (£59 million), which included other
fees. As per the Inter book, the fee was €69.5 million, but part of the Inter
fee (about 4.5%) was redistributed to youth clubs as solidarity contribution
(save for Juventus).

Ibrahimović started the 2009–10 season with his competitive debut for Barcelona
on 23 August 2009 by assisting on a goal by Lionel Messi, leading them to the
Supercopa de España, beating Athletic Bilbao 5–1 on aggregate. In his next
competitive match, Barcelona won the 2009 UEFA Super Cup with a 1–0 win over
Shakhtar Donetsk. In his third appearance, he scored his first goal in
Barcelona's La Liga season opener against Sporting Gijón in a 3–0 win.
Ibrahimović went on to score in his next four games, thus setting a team record
as the only player ever to score in his first five league matches.

On 20 October, he scored his first Champions League goal for Barcelona in a
group stage match against Rubin Kazan. Five days later, he scored twice in a 6–1
thrashing of Real Zaragoza, giving him a league-leading seven goals in seven
league matches while sending Barcelona to the top of the table. On 7 November,
however, he suffered a thigh injury that kept him out for three weeks. He
returned to action in week 12 of the season against Real Madrid as a second-half
substitute for Thierry Henry, and scored his eighth goal of the campaign. He
finished with 11 goals and 4 assists in all but two of Barcelona's first 15
league matches. Barcelona capped off 2009 by winning the 2009 FIFA Club World
Cup against Estudiantes on 19 December 2009.

Ibrahimović scored Barcelona's only goal in the 2009–10 Copa del Rey first leg
match of the round of 16 in a 2–1 loss to Sevilla on 5 January 2010. On 20
January, he was selected in the 2009 UEFA Team of the Year. His first goal of
2010 came on 14 February against Atlético Madrid. In his next appearance,
Ibrahimović scored against Stuttgart in the first leg of their UEFA Champions
League knockout stage fixture. He was sent off on 6 March in a league match
against Almería, which Barcelona appealed to no avail, and he was suspended for
one game. A calf strain during warmups before the next La Liga match following
his return from suspension against Athletic Bilbao ruled Ibrahimović out of the
second leg 4–1 victory over Arsenal, in which he scored two goals away from
home, the return leg of El Clásico against Madrid (which Barcelona won 2–0), and
the next league match against Deportivo de La Coruña. He made his return as a
substitute in the 82nd minute in a 0–0 away draw against Espanyol on 17 April.

He scored his final goal for Barcelona in the 2010 Supercopa de España on 14
August in a 3–1 defeat against Sevilla, and on 25 August, he played his last
match for the club against Milan for the Joan Gamper Trophy, after which he
claimed to the media that his relationship with coach Pep Guardiola had started
deteriorating and that Guardiola had not spoken to him since February.

On 28 August 2010, Milan announced via their official website that they had
signed Ibrahimović for the 2010–11 season. He was loaned out to Milan for the
season, with the club having the option to purchase him outright for €24 million
at the end of the season. He signed a four-year deal immediately after
successfully passing the medical examinations. Upon signing, Ibrahimović said,
"This move gives me more adrenaline. I have moved here to win the Champions
League with Milan. I want to win the double."

Ibrahimović made his Milan debut in a 2–0 loss to Cesena on 11 September, in
which he missed a penalty late in the match, and scored his first goals for the
club when Milan defeated Auxerre in their first Champions League match of the
season on 15 September. On 14 November, Ibrahimović scored the only goal in a
1–0 victory against his former club Inter in the Derby della Madonnina. On 20
November, he scored his seventh goal against Fiorentina in the 45th minute with
an over-the-head bicycle kick, passing Alexandre Pato as the team's top
goalscorer for the season. On 4 December 2010, in a game against Brescia, he
assisted Kevin-Prince Boateng to give Milan an early lead and then scored the
third goal by a powerful shot near the edge of the penalty box to give Milan a
3–0 win. On 12 December 2010, history repeated itself in the game against
Bologna after he assisted Boateng to give Milan an early lead once again and
scoring later that match to make it 3–0, leading him to 13 goals with 8 assists
in 21 matches in all competitions. Within days of the match, he was compared to
Milan legend Marco van Basten by both the media and van Basten himself.

Ibrahimović received a three-match ban after being shown a red card in a 1–1
home draw against Bari in March 2011 for punching Bari defender Marco Rossi in
the stomach. An additional three-match ban was given to Ibrahimović in February
2012 in a 2–1 home defeat against Fiorentina for swearing at an assistant
referee. Ibrahimović stated in his defence that he was talking to himself in
frustration. He won his first Scudetto with Milan after a draw against Roma. All
agreements between Milan and Barcelona were confirmed on 18 June 2011.

Ibrahimović started the new season on 6 August in the 2011 Supercoppa Italiana
against city rivals Inter, where he scored the first goal of a 2–1 comeback
victory to clinch the first trophy of the season. In the opening league match of
the 2011–12 season, Ibrahimović scored Milan's first goal of a 2–2 home draw
against Lazio. He scored his first Champions League goal of the season on 28
September in a 2–0 home win against Viktoria Plzeň, which was followed by
another one on 19 October against BATE Borisov in another 2–0 home win. He
continued with his solid performances as he scored in a 4–1 home win against
Parma and a brace in the team's 3–2 away victory over Roma, ending a successful
month of October.

November saw him score in consecutive games against BATE, in the Champions
League, and Catania, in the league. Later in the month against Barcelona in
another Champions League tie, Ibrahimović scored against his old club to
equalise the game at 1–1. Barça eventually pulled away however with Xavi scoring
the winning goal for the Catalan giants to make it 3–2 at the San Siro. He ended
November with a brace against Chievo, the first of those tallies brought his
Serie A career total to 100 goals. In December, Ibrahimović scored a goal in
each of five Serie A games.

As 2012 started, he scored against Atalanta converting a penalty kick. He was
the top goalscorer of Serie A, with 14 goals in 16 appearance following a brace
against Novara, of which the second goal came on a cheeky backheel. On 5 January
2012 in a match against Napoli, he was shown a red card for slapping Salvatore
Aronica in an off-the-ball incident, and was given yet another three-match ban
from Serie A games.

On 15 February, in the first leg of the Champions League's round of 16,
Ibrahimović set up both of Robinho's goals and also scored by a spot kick, thus
helping Milan win 4–0 over Arsenal. On 3 March, during the 4–0 away win against
Palermo, Ibrahimović took the lead of the goalscorers table as he scored a
first-half hat-trick to take his tally up to 17 goals. He finished the season as
Serie A top scorer with 28 goals in 32 matches.

On 17 July 2012, Paris Saint-Germain confirmed that they had reached an
agreement to acquire the sporting and economic rights of Ibrahimović from Milan,
having already agreed personal terms with the striker, for an initial transfer
fee of around €20 million, making Ibrahimović the most expensive footballer in
combined transfer fees. Valued at €180 million, these combined fees eclipsed
those commanded by Nicolas Anelka. His three-year contract would see him receive
a net annual salary of €14 million including bonuses (which would be €2 million
more than what he was earning per year just before he left Milan), and make him
the second best paid footballer in the world behind Samuel Eto'o.

The following day, Ibrahimović signed the contract and made the following
statement during the press conference: "It is a big step in my career and
another dream come true. I am very happy because it is a project that I want to
be involved in. I want to be part of the history of the club. I am here to win
and nothing else."

Ibrahimović scored twice in the second half for PSG to help them rally from 2–0
down at half-time to salvage a 2–2 home draw with Lorient in their opening
2012–13 Ligue 1 match. He scored two goals in the first half to help PSG to a
2–1 win over Lille which was PSG's first Ligue 1 win after three successive
draws in the first three league matches of the 2012–13 season.

In the opening 2012–13 Champions League Group A match against Dynamo Kyiv on 18
September 2012, Ibrahimović scored his sixth goal in only his fifth appearance
for Carlo Ancelotti's side through a penalty. He thus became the first man to
score for six clubs in the UEFA Champions League. On 8 October, Ibrahimović
became only the third player (after Ronaldinho and Laurent Blanc) to have played
in El Clásico in Spain, the Derby della Madonnina in Italy and Le Classique, the
derby between Marseille and PSG. He scored both of PSG's goals (the first goal
was from a backheel and the second was from a free kick) in the Ligue 1
Classique derby at the Stade Vélodrome on that day, with the match finishing
2–2. On 11 December 2012, he scored a hat-trick in a 4–0 away win against
Valenciennes.

In January 2013, Ibrahimović was handed the number 10 jersey after the departure
of Brazilian winger Nenê. In April 2013, Ibrahimović scored in a 2–2 draw
against his former club Barcelona in the quarter-finals of the Champions League.
PSG, however, were knocked out on away goals after drawing 1–1 at Camp Nou in
the second leg. He ended the season as the assists leader in the 2012–13
Champions League, providing seven assists.

On 12 May 2013, Paris Saint-Germain won the Ligue 1 title after a 1–0 away win
against Lyon, their third title and first since 1994. He ended the year as Ligue
1's top goalscorer with 30 goals, becoming the first player to reach that mark
in the French top flight since Jean-Pierre Papin in the 1989–90 season. On 20
May, he was named as Ligue 1's Player of the Year by the Union nationale des
footballeurs professionnels (UNFP).

Ibrahimović netted his first goal of the season on 31 August 2013, scoring deep
into stoppage time as PSG recorded a 2–0 victory over Guingamp. On 24 September,
it was announced that Ibrahimović had extended his contract with PSG, which
would see him stay at the club until 2016. A week later on 2 October, the Swede
scored twice as PSG ran out 3–0 winners over Benfica in a Champions League group
match.

On 19 October, he scored two goals in PSG's 4–0 win over Bastia, one an
audacious volleyed back heel as he reached behind the defender to fire the ball
into the net. The goal was later named as Ligue 1's Goal of the Season. Four
days later, Ibrahimović scored four goals in PSG's 5–0 away win against RSC
Anderlecht in the Champions League; he scored the eighth-fastest hat-trick in
the competition's history and became the 11th player to score four times or more
in a Champions League match. The third goal of the four was clocked at a speed
of 93 mph.

On 27 November, Ibrahimović made his 100th UEFA Champions League appearance,
scoring the opening goal in a 2–1 win over Olympiacos at the Parc des Princes.

On 16 March 2014, Ibrahimović scored both goals in a 2–0 win over Saint-Étienne
to surpass Carlos Bianchi's club record of 39 goals in a season. On 11 May, he
was named Ligue 1's Player of the Year for the second consecutive season.
Ibrahimović ended the Ligue 1 season as top scorer with 26 goals as PSG won a
second consecutive league title. Overall, he scored 41 goals in all
competitions, including ten in eight Champions League matches.

Ibrahimović scored his first two goals for Paris Saint Germain on 2 August 2014
against Guingamp in the 2014 Trophée des Champions, winning his first silverware
of the season. In the first league match of the season, Ibrahimović scored twice
but also missed an open net and had a penalty saved as PSG drew 2–2 with Reims.
Ibrahimović scored his first league hat-trick of the season in a match against
Saint-Étienne on 31 August.

In the quarter-finals of the Coupe de la Ligue on 13 January 2015, Ibrahimović
scored the only goal to win away at Saint-Étienne. The home team argued that the
ball had not crossed the line, and fans threw objects onto the pitch, disrupting
play for ten minutes.

On 11 March, Ibrahimović received a straight red card in a Champions League
round of 16 match against Chelsea at Stamford Bridge, for a foul on Oscar. PSG
drew 2–2 after extra time to qualify for the quarter-finals on away goals. Nine
days later, he scored a hat-trick in a 3–0 win over Lorient at the Parc des
Princes. He netted another hat-trick on 8 April as PSG reached the 2015 Coupe de
France Final with a 4–1 win over Saint-Étienne, starting with a penalty for his
100th goal for the club. He ended the match with 102 career goals for PSG,
second only to Pauleta. Three days later, he scored twice as PSG defeated Bastia
4–0 in the 2015 Coupe de la Ligue Final. The first goal was a penalty which he
won when fouled by Sébastien Squillaci, resulting in the Bastia defender's
dismissal.

On 4 October 2015, Ibrahimović scored both goals from penalty kicks in a 2–1
home win over Marseille to overtake Pauleta and become Paris Saint-Germain's
all-time leading goalscorer with 110 goals in all official competitions.

On 25 November, Ibrahimović captained PSG on his return to hometown club Malmö
FF in the group stage of the 2015–16 Champions League. He scored the team's
third goal in a 5–0 win, a result that confirmed PSG's qualification to the
knockout stage of the competition. In scoring twice in PSG's 3–0 win over Nice
on 4 December 2015, Ibrahimović beat Mustapha Dahleb's previous record of 85
goals to become the club's all-time top goalscorer in the French first division.

On 16 February 2016, in the 2015–16 UEFA Champions League round of 16 first leg
against Chelsea at home, Ibrahimović scored the opener in the 39th minute with a
free kick to help his team win 2–1. This was Ibrahimović's 116th appearance in
the Champions League, meaning that he overtook Carles Puyol to enter the
competition's all-time top ten appearance makers. Four days later, Ibrahimović
netted twice during the 4–1 home win over Reims, taking his tally up to 23
league goals; he also set up the goals of Edinson Cavani and Gregory van der
Wiel.

On 9 March, in the second leg of PSG's Champions League tie with Chelsea at
Stamford Bridge, Ibrahimović assisted a goal for Adrien Rabiot and scored the
winning goal himself as Paris won the match 2–1 and progressed to the
quarter-final stage with a 4–2 aggregate victory. With this goal, he became the
14th player to score 50 or more goals in UEFA club competitions. Four days
later, he scored four times in a 9–0 win at bottom team Troyes that sealed PSG's
league conquest with eight games remaining; his hat-trick goal was his 100th in
the league. His nine-minute hat-trick was the fastest in Ligue 1 history.

Later that day, he announced he would be leaving PSG at the end of the season,
while joking that only if they replaced the Eiffel Tower with a statue of
himself would he stay. On 16 April, Ibrahimović scored twice in a 6–0 home win
against Caen to earn him a season-best 32 goals in league; it was also his 41st
goal of the season, equaling his season-best in 2013–14 season with two games
less playing. Three days later, he netted the winner in the 2015–16 Coupe de
France semi-final match away against Lorient to send Paris into the final for
the second consecutive season; it was also his 42nd goal of the season, setting
a new personal best. On 8 May 2016, Ibrahimović was named UNFP Ligue 1 Player of
the Season for the third consecutive year.

Ibrahimović made his final Ligue 1 appearance for PSG against Nantes at the Parc
des Princes on 14 May 2016, scoring twice in a 4–0 victory to become Paris
Saint-Germain's top scorer in a single Ligue 1 season with 38 goals, which put
him one goal ahead of Carlos Bianchi, who managed 37 in the 1977–78 campaign.
Ibrahimović ended the 2015–16 Ligue 1 season as its top scorer, the third time
that he had done so. The league match was stopped briefly in the tenth minute as
fans gave Ibrahimović – whose PSG shirt was number 10 – a standing ovation. He
was also cheered just before the final whistle, holding his two sons in his
arms. They had run onto the pitch moments earlier, wearing number 10 PSG shirts
with either the word "King" or "Legend" written in English on the back. The
names were in reference to their father's "I came like a king, left like a
legend" post on social media before the match.

On 21 May 2016, Ibrahimović scored twice (his 155th and 156th goals in his 180th
and final competitive match for the club) in the second half of the 2016 Coupe
de France final, and also set up Edinson Cavani's goal. PSG defeated Marseille
4–2 in that match. He was substituted to a standing ovation in the final minutes
of the match. PSG thus won the Ligue 1-Coupe de France-Coupe de la Ligue
domestic treble for the second consecutive season, and equalled Marseille's
all-time record of ten Coupe de France titles.

On 1 July 2016, Ibrahimović signed as a free agent for Manchester United on a
one-year contract, which had the option of being extended depending on his
performance for the club. His salary is reported to be £200,000 per week. He was
handed the number 9 jersey ahead of the 2016–17 season.

On 7 August, Ibrahimović scored the match-winning goal for Manchester United in
the 2016 FA Community Shield, rising above Wes Morgan to head past Leicester
City goalkeeper Kasper Schmeichel in a 2–1 victory. In his Premier League debut
one week later, he scored with a long-range strike in the 3–1 away win at
Bournemouth on the opening day. On 20 August, he scored both goals; a header in
the first half and a penalty in the second, to beat Southampton 2–0 on his home
debut for the club. On 6 November, he scored twice in a 3–1 away win against
Swansea City; his first goal of the match was the 25,000th goal in Premier
League history. He was later booked however, picking up his fifth yellow card of
the season, ruling him out of Manchester United's league fixture at home against
Arsenal on 19 November. On 5 February 2017, Ibrahimović scored his 15th league
goal of the season and 20th in all competitions in a 3–0 away win against
Leicester City, becoming the oldest player to manage at least 15 goals in a
single Premier League season at the age of 35 years and 125 days.

On 16 February, Ibrahimović registered his first Manchester United hat-trick in
a 3–0 win over Saint-Étienne in the Europa League Round of 32. On 19 February,
he made his first FA Cup appearance, coming on as a 62nd-minute substitute and
scoring the winner in a 2–1 fifth round win against Blackburn Rovers at Ewood
Park. Exactly a week after his FA Cup debut, Ibrahimović scored two goals, a
free-kick and a header (the winning goal), in the 2017 EFL Cup Final to clinch
United's fifth League Cup and to win his first major trophy with the club.

On 7 March, Ibrahimović was suspended for three matches by The Football
Association for violent conduct after elbowing Bournemouth's Tyrone Mings in a
1–1 draw at Old Trafford three days earlier.

Ibrahimović was eligible to represent Sweden, Bosnia and Herzegovina or Croatia
at international level; he chose Sweden. He made his debut for Sweden in a 0–0
friendly draw against the Faroe Islands at Tipshallen on 31 January 2001 during
the 2000–01 Nordic Football Championship. On 7 October 2001, he played his first
competitive match, a 2002 World Cup qualifier against Azerbaijan, scoring his
first ever international goal in a 3–0 win as Sweden topped their group to
qualify for the upcoming tournament.

Ibrahimović was part of the Sweden squad at the 2002 FIFA World Cup held in
Korea and Japan, who were eliminated at the round of 16 by newcomers Senegal.

Sweden qualified for UEFA Euro 2004 as group winners, with Ibrahimović scoring
three goals throughout the qualifying campaign. In Sweden's opening group match
of Euro 2004 against Bulgaria on 14 June, Ibrahimović assisted one of Fredrik
Ljungberg's goals and later scored from a penalty in a 5–0 win. In the following
match against Italy on 18 June, he scored an 85th-minute equaliser with a
back-heel lob to seal a 1–1 draw and was named Man of the Match; the goal was
later named the best goal of the tournament. Sweden and Denmark subsequently
sealed a place in the knockout round on direct encounters following a 2–2 draw
in their final group match, despite a three-way five-point tie with Italy, with
Sweden topping the group. In the quarter-finals against the Netherlands, he
missed a penalty in the resulting shoot-out following a 0–0 draw after
extra-time, as Sweden were eliminated from the competition.

During the 2006 World Cup qualification campaign, Ibrahimović scored four goals
in a 7–0 victory away to Malta on 4 September 2004. He did not score during the
2006 World Cup finals, as Sweden were knocked out in the round of 16, this time
by Germany.

Ibrahimović was called up for a Euro 2008 qualifier against Liechtenstein on 6
September 2006, but two days before the match, he violated team curfew by
leaving the hotel with teammates Christian Wilhelmsson and Olof Mellberg,
visiting a nightclub. Though none of the players consumed any alcohol, they were
nonetheless all sent home by manager Lars Lagerbäck as punishment and did not
take part in the match. Mellberg and Wilhelmsson did not appeal the coach's
decision, but Ibrahimović felt that it was unjust and therefore refused to take
part in Sweden's next qualifiers against Iceland and Spain. He also refused to
partake in a friendly against Egypt on 7 February 2007, but ended his
self-imposed boycott a month later, and returned for Sweden's loss to Northern
Ireland on 28 March. He did not score in any of the 12 qualifying matches.
Ibrahimović was awarded the 2007 Swedish Golden Ball as the "Country's Top
Player of the Year".

Ibrahimović ended his international goal drought, which had lasted for over two
years, against Greece in Sweden's Euro 2008 opener on 10 June 2008, in which he
was named Man of the Match, also scoring in the next match against Spain four
days later. He finished the tournament with two goals as Sweden were eliminated
in the group stage by Russia. Ibrahimović scored a goal in a 4–0 win against
Malta on 10 June 2009 in a 2010 World Cup qualifier. On 5 September 2009, he
scored a last second goal in Ferenc Puskás Stadium against Hungary in a 2–1 win
for Sweden in their qualification match, although Sweden ultimately failed to
qualify for the tournament, finishing third in their qualifying group.

Ahead of the Euro 2012 qualification, Ibrahimović was named team captain on his
return to the national team by manager Erik Hamrén. He scored his first goals of
the qualifying game against San Marino, where he scored the first and fifth
goals in a 6–0 win in front of over 21,000 home fans despite being down to ten
men for over an hour. His next goals came in the form of a hat-trick against
Finland, whom they beat 5–0.

At the Euro 2012 finals, Ibrahimović scored the opening goal in Sweden's first
game of the tournament, a 2–1 defeat against hosts Ukraine. He then scored with
a volley, later considered the goal of the tournament, to open the score in
Sweden's 2–0 win against France in the last group match; he was later named Man
of the Match. Despite the victory, Sweden were knocked out of the competition in
the group stage. Although Sweden suffered a group stage elimination, Ibrahimović
was named to the Team of the Tournament for his performances.

In October 2012, Ibrahimović scored Sweden's first goal as they came from 4–0
down to draw 4–4 in a 2014 World Cup qualifier against Germany in Berlin. It was
the first time in its history that the German national team had not won a match
after leading by four goals.

On 14 November 2012, he scored all four goals in a 4–2 win over England in the
first ever match at the Friends Arena. His fourth goal, a 35-yard overhead kick
with his back to goal, won him praise from players and pundits, with the BBC
describing it as a goal that "combined unfathomable imagination and expert
technique". It would win the 2013 FIFA Puskás Award for Goal of the Year.

On 14 August 2013, Ibrahimović scored another international hat-trick at the
Friends Arena, scoring Sweden's first three goals in a 4–2 friendly win against
Scandinavian rivals Norway. Ibrahimović ended Sweden's qualifying campaign with
eight goals, including two in a play-off defeat to Portugal, as the team failed
to reach the 2014 World Cup. Ibrahimović summarised the defeat by saying: "One
thing is for sure, a World Cup without me is nothing to watch."

On 4 September 2014, Ibrahimović scored his 50th international goal in a 2–0
friendly match victory over Estonia, making him the Swedish national team's
all-time leading goalscorer. Earlier in the same match, he equaled Sven Rydell's
record of 49 by scoring the opening goal. On 8 September, he made his 100th
appearance for Sweden in a Euro 2016 qualifier against Austria at the Ernst
Happel Stadion in Vienna.

On 14 November 2015, Ibrahimović scored the winning goal for Sweden in a 2–1
victory in the home leg of the Euro 2016 qualifying play-off against rivals
Denmark. Three days later, he scored both Sweden's goals of a 2–2 draw in
Copenhagen to qualify the nation for the Euro 2016 finals. Ibrahimović scored 11
goals during the qualifying phase, making him its second-top goalscorer after
Poland's Robert Lewandowski.

On 11 May 2016, Ibrahimović made the final 23-man squad for Sweden at Euro 2016.
As captain, he played every minute of Sweden's three group matches, but did not
score any goals. He managed only one shot on target during the tournament.
Sweden finished in last place in their group and as a result were eliminated
along with seven other teams in the group stage. On 21 June 2016, Ibrahimović
announced that he would retire from international football immediately after
Sweden's last match at Euro 2016.

Ibrahimović has been described by ESPN as being "good in the air, quick, tall,
strong and agile, he plays well with his back to goal and boasts some of the
best finishing, vision, passing and ball control around." A versatile and
well-rounded footballer, from a tactical standpoint, Ibrahimović is capable of
playing anywhere along the front line, due to his ability to both create and
score goals for his team, although he is most often deployed as a striker, due
to his composure and eye for goal. He has also functioned in a more creative
playmaking role at times, as a supporting forward or even as a number 10, in
particular in his later career, after losing some of his pace and stamina with
age; this deeper position allows him to drop into midfield to pick up the ball,
where he can utilise his technical ability, vision, passing, and movement to
create space and provide assists for teammates.

While naturally right-footed, Ibrahimović is a powerful and accurate striker of
the ball from both inside or outside the penalty area with either foot, and is
also known for his accuracy from penalties and dead ball situations. An accurate
finisher with his head as well as with his feet, his height, elevation, and
strength often give him an advantage at winning aerial challenges, and also
allow him to function as a "target man"; despite his large stature, Ibrahimović
is uncommonly agile for a player of his size, and his athleticism and ability in
the air have seen him score several goals from acrobatic strikes and volleys
throughout his career, which earned him the monicker Ibracadabra in the Italian
media. In spite of his size and physique, Ibrahimović possesses excellent
technique and ball control, which, coupled with his balance, power, and
physicality, enables him to hold up the ball well with his back to goal, retain
possession, and link up with other players; he has also been praised by pundits
for his creativity and dribbling skills.

Due to his prolific goalscoring, consistency, and spectacular strikes,
Ibrahimović is regarded by many in the sport to be one of the best players in
the world and one of the most complete strikers of his generation; he has also
drawn praise from managers and teammates for his leadership and longevity, as
well as his fitness, professionalism, and dedication in training. Although he
has been criticised for his work-rate in big matches, in particular in his
youth, throughout his career he has scored in some of the biggest matches in
football, including the Milan Derby in Italy, El Clásico in Spain, Le Classique
in France, and the Manchester Derby and North-West Derby in England, as well as
in UEFA Champions League and UEFA Euro Championship games, against some of the
strongest opponents in football, also winning titles in several different
countries; he is the only player to have scored for six different clubs in the
Champions League. Known for his extroverted personality, despite his reputation
as a footballer, he has been criticised, however, for his arrogance, aggression
and rebellious character at times. Ibrahimović has frequently been compared to
Dutch legend Marco van Basten, due to their similar playing style and proclivity
for scoring from powerful shots and volleys; despite this comparison,
Ibrahimović has stated that his main influence was his idol, former Brazilian
superstar Ronaldo, whom he regards as the greatest player of all time.

Ibrahimović has been involved in several violent incidents with teammates, some
of which have gone viral on the internet. After a 2004 international friendly
against the Netherlands, Ajax teammate Rafael van der Vaart publicly accused
Ibrahimović of deliberately injuring him during the game. Ibrahimović responded
by threatening to break both of van der Vaart's legs. Ibrahimović also punched
Ajax teammate Mido in the dressing room after the latter had thrown a pair of
scissors at him.

During his spell at Barcelona, Ibrahimović had a falling-out with coach Pep
Guardiola, culminating in a dressing room incident in which Ibrahimović threw a
training-kit box across the room and screamed insults at Guardiola. Guardiola
eventually refused to speak to Ibrahimović and loaned him out to Milan.
Barcelona vice president Carles Vilarrubi further revealed that Ibrahimović had
threatened to publicly beat up Guardiola if he was not released to Milan.

In 2010, Ibrahimović was involved in a training-ground fistfight with Milan
teammate Oguchi Onyewu, after Ibrahimović made a two-footed tackle on him,
followed by a headbutt. They were separated and the session prematurely
abandoned, with Ibrahimović having suffered a broken rib in the fracas. Both
players had accused one of insulting the other. In March 2011, Ibrahimović was
given a three-match ban for punching Bari defender Marco Rossi in the stomach
during a game. He received another three-match ban in February 2012 for slapping
Napoli player Salvatore Aronica. In 2011, Ibrahimović kicked teammate Antonio
Cassano in the face while Cassano was speaking to reporters, and kicked Milan
teammate Rodney Strasser during a training session.

In November 2012 with PSG, he received a two-match ban for kicking AS
Saint-Étienne goalkeeper Stéphane Ruffier in the chest. In December 2012,
Ibrahimović was accused by Lyon defender Dejan Lovren and president Jean-Michel
Aulas of deliberately stamping on Lovren's head. In February 2013, UEFA handed
Ibrahimović a two-match ban for stamping on Valencia winger Andrés Guardado. In
March 2013, PSG winger Lucas claimed that Ibrahimović regularly insulted
teammates, stating, "He always asks for the ball and insults a lot. He is
sometimes a bit arrogant and complains." Lucas later claimed, however, that the
interview was twisted and badly translated. In May 2013, Ibrahimović was filmed
screaming at PSG sporting director Leonardo after the club's Ligue 1 title
victory.

Lyon coach Hubert Fournier accused Ibrahimović of abusing officials, stating in
January 2015 that "all the referees in this league get insulted by this person".
Two months later, after a loss by PSG in a Ligue 1 match, Ibrahimović ranted,
"In 15 years I've never seen a [good] referee in this shit country ... [they]
don't even deserve PSG." He later apologised, but was criticised by French
politicians, and Ligue 1 imposed a four-match ban.

Ibrahimović has additionally engaged in multiple incidents while with the
national team. After Sweden's 1–0 victory over the Faroe Islands in October
2012, Faroes captain Fróði Benjaminsen accused Ibrahimović of foul play and
insults, describing him as "arrogant", "childish", "ignorant", and a "dirty
player". In December 2015, French sports daily L'Équipe branded Ibrahimović and
Cristiano Ronaldo the "most arrogant" footballers in the world. Ibrahimović was
additionally caught on camera kicking teammate Christian Wilhelmsson during
training. In 2013, he came under fire from the Sweden women's national team for
an interview published on Christmas Day by tabloid Expressen, in which he had
commented about the disparity of achievements by, and the treatment of, male and
female footballers. His former teammate Anders Svensson had been rewarded with a
car for becoming Sweden's most-capped player that year, but Therese Sjögran had
received no such reward for doing likewise for the women's team, despite owning
41 more caps (187 to 146) than Svensson at the time. Ibrahimović's response to
the issue was that Sweden would be "devaluing" Svensson "by comparing him with
the ladies' individual achievements. They can get a bike with my autograph on it
and then we're good." Coach Pia Sundhage replied that his comments were "sad and
unfortunate" and epitomised "failings in the basic values of male football",
while Sjögran said, "I understand him when he says that the men's national team
brings in more money and exposure. That's true. But this is about respect."

In April 2016, Mino Raiola announced that Ibrahimović would be suing Swedish
trainer Ulf Karlsson over doping claims. According to Expressen, Karlsson cited
Ibrahimović's "unnatural" and "rapid weight gain" during his stint with
Juventus. Raiola said about the allegations, "The claims are just crazy – the
facts are not there. All the clubs Zlatan has been at know he doesn't even take
aspirin."

Ibrahimović has two siblings and three half-siblings. His longtime partner is
Helena Seger with whom he has two sons: Maximilian (born 22 September 2006) and
Vincent (born 6 March 2008). He currently resides outside Manchester, although
he still has a home in Malmö where he spends his summers. Ibrahimović received
an honorary black belt in taekwondo; he attended classes at the Malmö Taekwondo
club Enighet (English: Unity) as a child. Ibrahimović is fluent in five
languages; Swedish, Bosnian, English, Spanish and Italian. He has stated that he
is a Catholic.

The name "Zlatan" was trademarked in May 2003 at the Swedish Patent and
Registration Office for "most likely being perceived as Zlatan Ibrahimović",
which meant that he received exclusive rights to the name for certain products,
including sporting goods, clothing, and shoes. Ibrahimović is under contract
with Nike and features in their television advertising where he has appeared
alongside other players in the Nike stable including Cristiano Ronaldo, Neymar
and Wayne Rooney. He wears the Nike Mercurial boot line and has the names and
dates of birth of his sons embedded onto the external sides of his boots. In
late 2007, Ibrahimović, with the help of Nike, self-funded Zlatan Court in the
streets of the city district Rosengård in his hometown Malmö: he provided a
playing mat, goalposts, lighting and a modern fence. In 2008, he donated new
Nike kits to his youth club, FBK Balkan.

In a February 2011 interview, Ibrahimović stated that the boxer Muhammad Ali is
one of his role models, going on to say: "One of my idols in sport and outside
the sport also [sic]...he believed in his [principles] and he never gave [them]
up." While in Malmö with the national team in September 2012, Ibrahimović was
honoured with the inscription of his name on the city's "Walk of Fame of
Sports". The Swedish Post Office issued a set of five postage stamps featuring
Ibrahimovic in March 2014. Ibrahimović features in EA Sports' FIFA video game
series, and was the fourth highest rated player in FIFA 15.

On 11 August 2014, Ibrahimović paid US$51,000 to send the Swedish national
football team for the intellectually disabled to the INAS World Football
Championships in Brazil. After teammates Johan Elmander, Kim Källström, Andreas
Isaksson and Per Nilsson donated autographed jerseys to be auctioned off for the
cause, Ibrahimović responded, "What the hell are you going to do with a shirt?
How much is it to go?".

In a league match against Caen on 14 February 2015, Ibrahimović took off his
shirt after scoring a goal to unveil the removable tattooed names of 50 people
suffering from hunger around the world, in a gesture to raise awareness for
famine in accordance with the United Nations World Food Programme.

Independent Swedish film production company Auto Images released the sports
documentary Becoming Zlatan in February 2016 which follows Ibrahimović through
his formative years with Malmö FF and Ajax all the way to his breakthrough with
Juventus in 2005. The film has been featured at several film festivals including
the International Documentary Film Festival Amsterdam, Helsinki Documentary Film
Festival and the Rouen Nordic Film Festival amongst others.

Ibrahimović is a notable religious syncretist, drawing from the Islamic,
Catholic and Buddhist spiritual traditions.

Ibrahimović was born to a Bosnian Muslim father, Šefik Ibrahimović, and a
Croatian Catholic mother, Jurka Gravić; his parents were immigrants to Sweden
from the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and met for the first time in
Sweden. Ibrahimović's parents divorced when he was a child, and although his
upbringing was divided between them, he spent more time with his father: 'I had
time with my mother but I really lived with my father.'

The Malmö-based television presenter Teddy Landén, who was interviewed for the
same documentary, has noted that Ibrahimović's choice of shirt name following
his 2001 transfer to Ajax was religiously and culturally significant:

"You can see that just the fact that when he [emerged] in the professional
[football] world [at Ajax], from Sweden, where he was only known [by the name]
Zlatan – his first name – he changed so he would have Ibrahimović on his shirt,
on his jersey, because he wanted to honour his background. Being from a Muslim
background, being from a very very low key, very low status background, he
really [wanted] to show all the kids from Rosengård [and] from Malmö in general:
'If I can do it, you can do it.'"

In interviews, Ibrahimović has stressed both his Muslim and Catholic parentage,
and is religiously syncretic; he views football as a meta-religion in which
"everyone is welcome". In an interview with CNN on 24 November 2015, he stressed
that his Muslim background was "not a factor" in fans' perception of him: "For
me, it didn't change (anything) because my father is Muslim and my mother is
Catholic... For me it is all about respect. That's how I grew up and the way I
learned to be. This is what I am."

Ibrahimović's religious syncretism is also visible in his body art, which
references Islam, Buddhism and deism:

1 Includes UEFA Champions League and UEFA Cup / Europa League matches. 2
Includes Johan Cruyff Shield, Supercoppa Italiana, Supercopa de España, Trophée
des Champions, FA Community Shield, UEFA Super Cup and FIFA Club World Cup
matches.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_BFG_(2016_film)

The BFG is a 2016 American fantasy adventure film directed and co-produced by
Steven Spielberg, written by Melissa Mathison and based on the 1982 novel of the
same name by Roald Dahl. The film stars Mark Rylance, Ruby Barnhill, Penelope
Wilton, Jemaine Clement, Rebecca Hall, Rafe Spall and Bill Hader. In the film,
an orphan human girl befriends a benevolent giant, dubbed the "Big Friendly
Giant", who takes her to Giant Country, where they attempt to stop the
man-eating giants that are invading the human world.

Kathleen Kennedy and Frank Marshall began development on a live-action
adaptation of The BFG back in the 1990s, and various screenwriters were hired to
work on the screenplay in the subsequent years. DreamWorks acquired the screen
rights to Dahl's book in September 2011, and Marshall and Sam Mercer joined as
producers, Mathison as screenwriter, and Kennedy as executive producer.
Spielberg was announced as director in April 2014, alongside his production
company Amblin Entertainment as co-producer. Principal photography commenced in
March 2015, marking Spielberg's first directorial film for Walt Disney Pictures.

The BFG premiered at the Cannes Film Festival on May 14, 2016, and held its
North American debut at the El Capitan Theater on June 21, 2016. The film was
released in the United States in Disney Digital 3-D, RealD 3D, IMAX 3D, and
conventional theatrical formats on July 1, 2016, the same year of Dahl's
centennial. The film received generally positive reviews from critics, though
the film was a box office disappointment according to analysts, with a worldwide
gross of $183.2 million on a $140 million budget.

Sophie, a ten year old orphaned girl who lives in a London orphanage, stays
awake reading through the nights due to her insomnia. At 3:00 AM or what she
calls the "witching hour", she sees an elderly giant outside her window. The
giant captures her and takes her into Giant Country. There, he explains that
Sophie must stay with him for the rest of her life because she saw him and must
not be allowed to reveal the existence of giants. After learning that she has
insomnia and that she doesn't believe he can control dreams, he manages to read
her to sleep and gives her a nightmare about failing to escape and being eaten
by another giant.

When they return to the BFG's home, the other giants barge in and upend the
place looking for Sophie, destroying much of the BFG's hard work. Sophie evades
detection and the enraged BFG finally stands up to them and drives them off with
a hot fire iron. While hidden, Sophie finds the home of the last human to live
with the BFG before becoming a victim of Fleshlumpeater's group. She leaves his
jacket on his bed and finds a portrait of Queen Victoria amongst his belongings.
From this she devises a plan to forge a nightmare and give it to Elizabeth II,
the Queen of the United Kingdom. The nightmare consists of giants eating the
children of England, the British Army fighting the giants, and Sophie appearing
on her windowsill.

They head to Buckingham Palace where upon waking from her nightmare, the Queen
and her maid Mary find Sophie on the windowsill as in the nightmare with the BFG
outside in the palace grounds. Sophie and the BFG inform the Queen, Mary, and
Mr. Tibbs that the child-eating beasts in her dream are indeed real and must be
stopped at all costs before they cause any more harm to her subjects. After a
large breakfast they all enjoy, the Queen soon dispatches soldiers to Giant
Country.

Producers Frank Marshall and Kathleen Kennedy began development on a live-action
adaptation of The BFG in 1991, and set the project up at Paramount Pictures.
Husband and wife screenwriters Robin Swicord and Nicholas Kazan wrote a
screenplay adaptation in 1998, with Robin Williams in negotiations for the title
role. Williams attended a read-through, which according to Michael Siegel was
"surprisingly disappointing". Williams' trademark improvisational style clashed
with the BFG's unique language. Siegel elaborates, "He was sort of improvising
on the jumbled language. And it was clunky. It was strangely not working. It was
harder than it looks even for Robin. It didn't quite deliver." By 2001, the
script had been rewritten by Gwyn Lurie, and was greeted with positive feedback
from the Dahl estate. Terry Jones and Ed Solomon also attempted screenplay
drafts. While the screenplay lingered in development hell, Paramount
subsequently lost the film rights and they reverted to the Dahl estate.

In September 2011, DreamWorks acquired the film rights to the book; Kennedy and
Marshall were announced to produce, with screenwriter Melissa Mathison adapting
the story. Initially, John Madden was hired to direct, however, in April 2014,
Steven Spielberg was announced as the director, with Madden now listed as
executive producer with producer Michael Siegel. Kennedy had initially thought
of Spielberg as director, but hesitated asking him until a more concrete
screenplay was presentable. Spielberg stated, "The BFG has enchanted families
and their children for more than three decades. We are honoured that the Roald
Dahl estate has entrusted us with this classic story." Walden Media agreed to
co-produce and co-finance the film with DreamWorks and Amblin in March 2015. A
month later, Walt Disney Studios—which was under prior agreement to distribute
the film through its Touchstone Pictures banner—also joined the production as a
co-producer and co-financier, and shifted the film from a Touchstone release to
a Walt Disney Pictures production instead. Consequently, The BFG is the first
Disney-branded film directed by Spielberg, though he has previously produced
several films for the studio. Additionally, DreamWorks did not receive a marquee
credit—placement of the studio's production logo on marketing materials, nor in
the film's opening titles, and instead is represented by Amblin, although
DreamWorks still serves as a copyright holder for the film. The film is the
second adaptation of the novel following the 1989 direct-to-television animated
film.

Mark Rylance was cast in the film's title role in October 2014. Spielberg had
approached Rylance with the role during filming of Bridge of Spies. Spielberg
was quoted as saying that "Mark Rylance is a transformational actor. I am
excited and thrilled that Mark will be making this journey with us to Giant
Country. Everything about his career so far is about making the courageous
choice and I'm honoured he has chosen The BFG as his next big screen
performance." Rylance performed the character through motion capture, a process
which he referred to as "liberating". In mid-November 2014, it was revealed that
a ten-year-old student of Lower Peover School, Ruby Barnhill, had auditioned for
the film. She had to learn six pages of dialogue in preparation for a possible
role as the orphan Sophie. After a lengthy search, on December 16, Barnhill was
cast in the role, about which she said, "I feel incredibly lucky and I'm so
happy." Spielberg stated that they "have discovered a wonderful Sophie in Ruby
Barnhill." Bill Hader was set to star in the film in an unspecified role on
March 27, 2015. On April 13, 2015, the rest of the cast was announced, which
included Penelope Wilton, Rebecca Hall, Jemaine Clement, Michael David
Adamthwaite, Daniel Bacon, Chris Gibbs, Adam Godley, Jonathan Holmes, Paul Moniz
de Sa, and Ólafur Ólafsson.

Principal photography on the film began on March 23, 2015, in Vancouver and
concluded on June 12, 2015. Weta Digital worked on the film's visual effects. It
is Mathison's final film following her death on November 4, 2015.

John Williams composed and conducted the film's musical score, marking the
twenty-seventh collaboration between Spielberg and Williams. Williams was
announced as the film's composer in March 2015. During the process of writing
the score, Williams compared the film to "a child’s ballet where there are
dances involved," elaborating, "The BFG tries to capture dreams with his net and
does something that almost looks like a Ray Bolger or Fred Astaire dance; It is
an amazingly musical and choreographic sequence which required the orchestra to
do things that are more associated with musical films." Williams found
similarities with the scoring of Home Alone, admitting that writing music for
The BFG “was really an opportunity to compose and orchestrate a little
children’s fantasy for orchestra." The soundtrack was released by Walt Disney
Records on July 1, 2016.

The BFG premiered on May 14, 2016, at the 2016 Cannes Film Festival, in an out
of competition screening. It was released in the United States on July 1, 2016,
and was distributed worldwide by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, except for
territories in Europe, Africa and the Middle East, where the film's distribution
rights were sold by DreamWorks' international partner, Mister Smith
Entertainment, to independent distributors. Entertainment One Films distributed
the film in the U.K. on July 22, 2016. DreamWorks' financial partner, Reliance
Entertainment, released the film in India on July 29, 2016. Huaxia Film
Distribution released the film in China. Medusa Film released the film in Italy
on December 30, 2016.

Disney released a teaser trailer on December 9, 2015. A second trailer was
released on April 5, 2016. A third trailer was released on May 16, 2016. The
film held its North American premiere at the El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood,
California on June 21, 2016.

Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released The BFG on Blu-ray, DVD, and
digital download on November 29, 2016. The film debuted in third of the home
media sales chart for the week ending on December 2, 2016.

The BFG grossed $55.5 million in North America and $127.5 million in other
territories for a worldwide total of $183 million, against a production budget
of $140 million.

In the United States and Canada, The BFG opened alongside The Legend of Tarzan
and The Purge: Election Year at 3,357 theaters, and was projected to gross
$22–32 million in its opening weekend. The film was notably vying for drawing
family audiences with the studio's own Finding Dory. It made $775,000 from its
Thursday previews, however the low figure was not surprising, given how family
films tend to attract less audiences during late-night showings. This was
followed by a $7 million opening day (including previews) and a disappointing
$18.6 million opening weekend, which Deadline.com called "an awful start for
this film which is estimated to cost $140 million". Forbes noted that Steven
Spielberg's films tend to have long runs, irrespective of their opening numbers.
However, it also pointed out that the July 4th weekend proves to be a non-leggy
release schedule and most films released during this time end up making only
twice their holiday total over the course of their domestic theatrical run. The
New York Times called the opening figures "a colossal misfire".

Due to the film's poor performance in North America, the film was considered a
box office disappointment. As a result of its low opening numbers in North
America, the film will be depending heavily on financial success in its
international markets, as pointed out by David Hollis, Disney's distribution
chief, saying, "we're going to be reliant in a lot of ways on international
[audiences]". Internationally – during its opening weekend – where the 4th of
July weekend is not a holiday, the film opened to $3.9 million in its opening
weekend from two markets, Australia and Russia. In Australia, it opened to $2
million placing third while in Russia it debuted second with $1.9 million, which
tops the entire runs of Charlie and the Chocolate Factory and War Horse. In the
United Kingdom, where the book is more well-known, it opened to $6.9 million.

In China, the release was handled by Huaxia Film Distribution. While it
benefitted from a robust marketing effort including Spielberg's presence in the
country itself, it suffered from a three month long delay after its North
American release. It had an estimated $13.8 million opening, debuting at second
place behind Operation Mekong. Many Chinese online reviews criticized Spielberg
for making the film "too juvenile" for adults.

The BFG is one of the lowest-grossing films of Spielberg's career, specifically
in North America, when accounting for inflation and one of the year's biggest
flops, but The Hollywood Reporter noted that Disney would be able to withstand
the losses due to the success of Captain America: Civil War and Finding Dory.
The site also highlighted that the financial losses for Disney could be $90–100
million based on theatrical returns alone.

On the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 75%
based on 259 reviews, with an average rating of 6.8/10. The site's critical
consensus reads, "The BFG minimizes the darker elements of Roald Dahl's classic
in favor of a resolutely good-natured, visually stunning, and largely successful
family-friendly adventure." On another aggregator, Metacritic, the film has a
score of 66 out of 100 based on 47 critics, indicating "generally favorable
reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A−"
on an A+ to F scale.

Justin Chang of Los Angeles Times wrote a positive review, extolling Rylance's
performance as a "brilliant amalgam of performance-capture technology and
peerless screen presence." Scott Mendelson of Forbes lauded the film as "a
charming, intelligent, and witty little adventure movie with strong special
effects work in the service of a most unassuming story." Mendelson also
commended the film's smaller scope in story, as well as Rylance and Barnhill's
interaction. Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph wrote a positive review,
calling the film "a significant technical accomplishment", adding that "the
infinitesimally detailed motion-capture technology alone, which stretches
Rylance’s human performance to gargantuan proportions, is river-straddling
bounds beyond anything that’s come before it." Critic Matt Zoller Seitz highly
appreciated Spielberg's direction of the film, giving the film three and a half
out of four stars. Seitz remarks that "I can imagine some adults finding the
movie dull; 'Nothing happens', they'll say. 'And it's too nice.' But I can
imagine other adults loving the film for helping them remember what it's like to
be young enough to hide from a movie monster because he's big and weird-looking
and then laugh because he's kind of silly..."

Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter wrote a mixed review, comparing the film
objectively to Spielberg's E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial, as a "conspicuously less
captivating, magical and transporting experience than its classic forebear."
Peter Debruge of Variety, however, compared the film favorably to E.T., writing,
"this splendid Steven Spielberg-directed adaptation makes it possible for
audiences of all ages to wrap their heads around one of the unlikeliest
friendships in cinema history, resulting in the sort of instant family classic
“human beans” once relied upon Disney to deliver." A. O. Scott of The New York
Times gave a mixed review, praising the film's digital effects and visual style
as "exquisite", while noting that the film lacked the excitement found in
Spielberg's previous fantasy films.

Richard Brody of The New Yorker gave a negative review of the film, stating that
it "plays like a forced march of fun, a mandatory strain of magic and a
prescribed dose of poetry, like a movie ready-made for screening in classrooms
when a teacher is absent." Brody, however, observes that "Spielberg is the BFG
who's menaced by bigger and more monstrous giants who aren't interested in
edifying their audiences but merely in consuming them—consuming the consumer, so
to speak." Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times called the film "technically
impressive but listless and tedious... painfully cutesy, silly and gross rather
than whimsical and funny." He thought that the film moved far too slowly and was
missing a "sense of wonder and adventure", saying that he'd "rather see every
one of Spielberg's previous films before having to sit through "The BFG" again".
Cole Smithey described the film as a "drab affair". Giving The BFG one star out
of five, he criticised its "creepy style of animation [and] dragging tempo".
Several critics were unimpressed with Barnhill's performance, calling her
"somewhat wooden", "cloying" "blah" and "grating".



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Gove

Michael Andrew Gove (/ˈɡoʊv/; born 26 August 1967) is a British Conservative
politician, who was Secretary of State for Education from 2010 to 2014 and
Secretary of State for Justice from 2015 to 2016. He has been the Member of
Parliament (MP) for Surrey Heath since 2005. He is also an author and is a
columnist for The Times.

Born in Edinburgh, Gove was raised in Aberdeen and attended Lady Margaret Hall,
Oxford, after which he began his career as a journalist. He was first elected to
the House of Commons in the 2005 election for the safe Conservative seat of
Surrey Heath. He was appointed to the Shadow Cabinet by David Cameron in 2007 as
Shadow Secretary of State for Children, Schools and Families.

After the formation of the Coalition Government in 2010, Gove was appointed
Secretary of State for Education. Gove sought to expand the academies programme
introduced by the previous Labour Government. At its 2013 conference, Gove was
criticised by the National Association of Head Teachers, whose members condemned
the "climate of bullying, fear and intimidation" they said he had created during
his time as Education Secretary, and passed a vote of no confidence in his
policies. Votes of no confidence were also passed by the Association of Teachers
and Lecturers, National Union of Teachers and NASUWT at their conferences in
2013.

In a 2014 Cabinet reshuffle, Gove was moved to the post of Chief Whip. Following
the 2015 election, Gove was promoted to the offices of Lord Chancellor and
Secretary of State for Justice.

In 2016, Gove played a major role in the UK's referendum on EU membership as the
co-convenor of Vote Leave and along with Boris Johnson, became a key figurehead
of the campaign.

On 30 June 2016, Gove, who was campaign manager for Boris Johnson's drive to
become Prime Minister, withdrew his support on the morning that Johnson was due
to declare, and announced his own candidacy in the leadership election. In the
first round of voting, Gove came third to Theresa May and Andrea Leadsom. He was
eliminated from the leadership race on the second ballot on 7 July 2016.
Following her appointment as Prime Minister, May did not appoint him to the
Cabinet on 14 July 2016, and he was succeeded as Lord Chancellor and Secretary
of State for Justice by Liz Truss.

Gove was born in Edinburgh and named Graham by his mother; at four months old,
he was adopted by a Labour-supporting family in Aberdeen, where he was brought
up. His adoptive father ran a fish processing business; his adoptive mother was
a lab assistant at the University of Aberdeen before working at the Aberdeen
School for the Deaf.

In Aberdeen he was educated at a state school, and later attended the
independent Robert Gordon's College, to which he had won a scholarship. In
October 2012, Gove wrote an apology letter to his former French teacher for
misbehaving in class.

From 1985 to 1988 he studied English at Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, where he
served as President of the Oxford Union. He was awarded a 2:1-degree.

Gove became a trainee reporter at the Press and Journal in Aberdeen, where he
spent several months on strike in the 1989–1990 dispute over union recognition
and representation. He joined the The Times in 1996 as a leader writer and
assumed posts as its comment editor, news editor, Saturday editor and assistant
editor. He has also written a weekly column on politics and current affairs for
the newspaper and contributed to The Times Literary Supplement, Prospect
magazine and The Spectator. He remains on good terms with Rupert Murdoch, whom
Gove described in evidence before the Leveson Inquiry as "one of the most
impressive and significant figures of the last 50 years". He has also written a
sympathetic biography of Michael Portillo and a critical study of the Northern
Ireland peace process, The Price of Peace, for which he won the Charles
Douglas-Home Prize. He has worked for the BBC's Today programme, On The Record,
Scottish Television and the Channel 4 current affairs programme A Stab in the
Dark, alongside David Baddiel and Tracey MacLeod, and was a regular panellist on
BBC Radio 4's The Moral Maze and Newsnight Review on BBC Two.

Gove was a member of the winning team in Grampian Television's quiz show Top
Club, and played the school chaplain in the 1995 family comedy A Feast at
Midnight.

He briefly joined the Labour Party in 1983 back in Aberdeen, but by the time he
left to go to Oxford University, he stated that he was a Tory.[citation needed]
Gove joined the Oxford University Conservative Association and was secretary of
Aberdeen South Young Conservatives. He helped to write speeches for Cabinet and
Shadow Cabinet ministers, including Peter Lilley and Michael Howard. When
applying for a job at the Conservative Research Department he was told he was
"insufficiently political" and "insufficiently Conservative", so he turned to
journalism.

Gove had been chairman of Policy Exchange, a conservative think tank launched in
2002. He was involved in founding the right-leaning magazine Standpoint, to
which he occasionally contributes. Gove expressed admiration in late February
2003 for New Labour Prime Minister Tony Blair because of the way he was handling
the crisis in Iraq: "As a right-wing polemicist, all I can say looking at Mr
Blair now is, what’s not to like?" Blair, he thought, was "behaving like a true
Thatcherite".

Gove entered the House of Commons after the 2005 general election having been
elected as the Conservative member of parliament for the seat of Surrey Heath,
after the incumbent MP Nick Hawkins was deselected by the local Conservative
Association. When Cameron was elected as party leader in December 2005, he
appointed Gove as shadow housing spokesman. Gove is seen as part of an
influential set of Tories, sometimes referred to as the Notting Hill Set, which
includes David Cameron, George Osborne, Edward Vaizey, Nicholas Boles and Rachel
Whetstone.

On 2 July 2007, Gove was promoted to the Shadow Cabinet as Shadow Secretary of
State for Children, Schools and Families (a newly created department set up by
Gordon Brown), shadowing Ed Balls. Before the 2010 general election, most of
Gove's questions in Commons debates concerned children, schools and families,
education, local government, council tax, foreign affairs, and the environment.

Michael Portillo said in June 2012 that Gove could be a serious contender in a
future race for the Conservative leadership, though Gove had said in an
interview a few months before that "I'm constitutionally incapable of it.
There's a special extra quality you need that is indefinable, and I know I don't
have it. There's an equanimity, an impermeability and a courage that you need.
There are some things in life you know it's better not to try."

With the formation of the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition government
after the May 2010 general election, Gove became Secretary of State for
Education. His first moves included reorganising his department, announcing
plans to allow schools rated as "outstanding" by Ofsted to become academies, and
cutting the previous government's school-building programme. He was forced to
apologise, however, when the list of terminated school-building projects he had
released was found to be inaccurate. The list was reannounced several times
before it was finally accurately published.

In July 2010, Gove said that Labour had failed in its attempt to break the link
between social class and school achievement despite spending billions of pounds:
quoting research, he indicated that by the age of 6, children of low ability
from affluent homes were still out-performing brighter children from poor
backgrounds. At a House of Commons Education Select Committee he said that this
separation of achievement grew larger throughout pupils' school careers,
stating, "In effect, rich thick kids do better than poor clever children when
they arrive at school [and] the situation as they go through gets worse".

In February 2011 a judicial review deemed Gove's decision to axe Building
Schools for the Future (BSF) projects in six local authority areas was unlawful
as he had failed to consult before imposing the cuts. The judge also said that,
in five of the cases, the failure was "so unfair as to amount to an abuse of
power" and that "however pressing the economic problems, there was no overriding
public interest which precluded consultation or justifies the lack of any
consultation". The councils' response was that the government would have to
reconsider but the government said it had won the case on the substantial
issues. The judge made clear that, contrary to the councils' position, they
could not expect that their projects would be funded.

In March 2011 Gove was criticised for not understanding the importance of school
architecture and having misrepresented the cost. In February 2011, he gave
"not-quite-true information to Parliament" by saying that one individual made
£1 million in one year when the true figure was £700,000 for five advisers at
different times over a four-year period. He told a Free schools conference that
"no one in this room is here to make architects richer" and specifically
mentioned architect Richard Rogers.

Gove's views on exam systems became clear in December 2014 after the release of
archive papers from 1986. GCSEs were the brainchild of Sir Keith Joseph, and
Margaret Thatcher, believing they lacked rigour, fiercely opposed them. However
opposition to the new exams from the teaching unions persuaded her to introduce
them immediately, purely so as not to appear weak. Although Gove had sought but
failed to replace them, his special advisor, Dominic Cummings, described the
1986 decision as catastrophic, leading to a collapse in the integrity of the
exam system.

During the 2010 Conservative Party Conference, Gove announced that the primary
and secondary-school national curricula for England would be restructured, and
that study of authors such as Byron, Keats, Jane Austen, Dickens and Thomas
Hardy would be reinstated in English lessons as part of a plan to improve
children's grasp of English literature and language. Academies are not required
to follow the national curriculum, and so would not be affected by the reforms.
Children who fail to write coherently and grammatically, and who are weak in
spelling, would be penalised under new examinations. Historian Simon Schama
would give advice to government to ensure that pupils learnt Britain's "island
story". Standards in mathematics and science would also be strengthened. He
claimed that this was needed because left-wing ideologues had undermined
education. Theirs was the view, he thought, that schools "shouldn't be doing
anything so old-fashioned as passing on knowledge, requiring children to work
hard, or immersing them in anything like dates in history or times tables in
mathematics. These ideologues may have been inspired by generous ideals but the
result of their approach has been countless children condemned to a prison house
of ignorance".

In a November 2010 white paper, Gove declared reforms would include the
compulsory study of foreign languages up to the age of 16, and a shake-up of
league tables in which schools are ranked higher for the number of pupils taking
GCSEs in five core subjects: English; mathematics; science; a language; and one
of the humanities. He also announced that experts such as historian Simon Schama
will be brought in to review the curriculum, and that targets are to be
introduced for primary schools for the first time. Additionally, trainee
teachers will spend more time in the classroom, there would be more assessment
of teacher training applicants—including tests of character and emotional
intelligence—and former troops will be offered sponsorship to retrain as
teachers to improve discipline. Teachers are also expected to receive guidance
on how to search pupils for more items, including mobile phones and pornography,
and when they can use force.

In April 2011 Gove criticised schools for not studying pre-20th century classics
and blamed "England's constricted and unreformed exam system" for failing to
encourage children to read. Gove also blamed an "anti-knowledge culture" for
reducing achievement and said children benefited when expectations were set
higher. In June 2011 his "ignorance of science" was criticised after he called
for students to have "a rooting in the basic scientific principles" and by way
of example assigned Lord Kelvin's laws of thermodynamics to Sir Isaac Newton.

In June 2012, the Daily Mail published leaked plans to scrap GCSE examinations,
return to O-level exams and allow less able students to take less academic
qualifications. The Liberal Democrats claimed that the plans had not been
discussed with the Deputy Prime Minister and were subsequently heavily
criticised by some teachers, trade unions and Labour Party MPs; they had been
discussed with the Prime Minister at Cabinet level, and a subsequent
YouGov/Sunday Times poll suggested that the public supported this policy by a
margin of 50% to 32%. They also received praise from the Mayor Boris Johnson,
who said that he "could be...singing a hymn of praises for my old chum Gove and
his brilliant new Gove-levels." The leaked documents also suggested that Gove
was intending to create a single exam board to organise all exams, and to scrap
the National Curriculum in its current form. However, there were "rebukes" from
both the Welsh and Northern Ireland Education ministers who said it was
important to communicate before making announcements on proposed changes to
jointly owned qualifications.

In February 2013, shortly after the draft Programmes of Study for History in the
national curriculum was released by the DfE, the representatives of the
principal organisations for historians in the UK wrote to the The Observer to
register "significant reservations" about its contents and the way in which it
had been devised. In March 2013, 100 academics wrote to "warn of the dangers
posed by Michael Gove's new National Curriculum". Gove retorted that "there is
good academia and bad academia." His closest advisers are known to have mottoes
like "purges work". In response, one signatory to the letter opined that Gove
suffered from a "blinkered, almost messianic, self-belief, which appears to have
continually ignored the expertise and wisdom of teachers, head-teachers,
advisers and academics, whom he often claims to have consulted", while one of
the country's leading education experts and the person who headed up the biggest
review of British primary education in 40 years, Cambridge's Robin Alexander,
declared: "It's surely proper to ask whether heaping abuse on members of the
electorate because they hold different views is what government in a democracy
is about." A senior civil servant then admitted that one of the most
controversial parts of the proposed secondary curriculum had been written
internally by the DfE, without any input from experts. In May, Simon Schama,
earlier mooted as a supporter of Gove's reforms of the history curriculum,
delivered an excoriating speech in which he characterised the finalised
proposals as "insulting and offensive" and "pedantic and utopian", accusing Gove
of constructing a "ridiculous shopping list" of subjects. He urged the audience
at the Hay Festival: "Tell Michael Gove what you think of it. Let him know." In
June, leaked documents revealed that a member of the government's curriculum
advisory group had described the reform process as having had "a very chaotic
feel. It's typical of government policy at the moment: they don't think things
through very carefully, they don't listen to anyone and then just go ahead and
rush into major changes." In September, Robin Alexander said that the proposed
reforms to the primary-level national curriculum were "neo Victorian",
"educationally inappropriate and pedagogically counter-productive". In October
almost 200 people, including Carol Ann Duffy, Melvin Burgess and Michael Rosen,
as well as academics from Oxford, Bristol and Newcastle signed a letter to The
Times condemning Gove's reforms, warning of the "enormous" and negative risks
they posed to children and their education. The same month saw Oxford's head of
admissions warn that the timetable for secondary-level reforms would "just wreck
the English education system."

In September 2012, following the furore surrounding the downgrading of GCSE
English results, he refused to instruct Ofqual to intervene, and attacked his
Welsh counterpart as "irresponsible and mistaken" for ordering disputed GCSEs to
be regraded. On 17 September he announced to the House of Commons an English
Baccalaureate Certificate to replace GCSE, comprising English, Maths, Science,
together with a Humanities subject and language, to be first examined in 2017.
His plans to replace GCSE examinations with an English Baccalaureate were
rejected by Parliament in February 2013.

As Shadow Secretary of State for Children, Schools and Families, Gove advocated
the introduction of a Swedish-style voucher system, whereby parents can choose
where their child should be educated, with the state paying what they would have
cost in a state-school. He has also advocated Swedish-style free schools, to be
managed by parents and funded by the State, with the possibility that such
schools may be allowed to be run on a for-profit model.

In June 2012, Gove approved three creationist schools, such as Grindon Hall
Christian School in Sunderland, which opened in September 2012. This led to
concerns about whether Department for Education (DfE) requirements not to teach
creationism or intelligent design as science would be met. The other creationist
schools included Exemplar-Newark Business Academy, whose previous application
was rejected because of concerns over creationism, and a third school in Kent.
Both of these schools said they would teach creationism in RE but not in
Science. The British Humanist Association (BHA) said teaching creationism in any
syllabus was unacceptable. In 2014, Gove's department acceded to the BHA's
campaign by banning creationism from being taught as science in state-funded
English schools, including Academies and Free Schools, as well as introducing a
requirement that such schools must teach evolution.

In September 2013 news that the DfE did not maintain a register of children's
homes in the UK came to light as a result of an article Gove wrote for The Daily
Telegraph. Gove asserted his prior ignorance and surprise that the department
did not hold this information and claimed that "Ofsted was prevented by 'data
protection' rules, 'child protection' concerns and other bewildering regulations
from sharing that data with us, or even with the police".

Gove's claim was refuted the same day by the Information Commissioner, Sir
Christopher Graham, who pointed out there was "nothing" in data protection
legislation that prevents vulnerable young people from being properly protected
in care homes. Graham noted that "[t]his law covers information about people so
it has no bearing on the disclosure of non-personal information like the
location of care homes", and said he would be writing to both Gove and Sir
Michael Wilshaw about the matter.

In June 2014, a very public argument arose between the Home Office and
Department for Education Ministers about responsibility for alleged extremism in
Birmingham schools, which required PM David Cameron's intervention to resolve.
The Prime Minister asked Gove to apologise to Home Office Office for Security
and Counter-Terrorism Head Charles Farr for briefings critical of him which
appeared on The Times front page.

Gove was criticised by teaching professionals for his attempts to overhaul
British education.

At the Association of Teachers and Lecturers (ATL) Annual Conference in March
2013 a motion of no-confidence in Gove was passed. This was followed up the next
month at the annual conference of the National Union of Teachers (NUT), who
unanimously passed a vote of no confidence in Gove, the first time in its
history that it performed such an action, and called for his resignation. The
audience at the NUT conference were told that Gove had "lost the confidence of
the teaching profession", "failed to conduct his duties in a manner befitting
the head of a national education system", and "chosen to base policy on dogma,
political rhetoric and his own limited experience of education."

Gove was further criticised at the May 2013 conference of the National
Association of Head Teachers (NAHT), for what was said to have been a climate of
bullying, fear and intimidation during his time as Education Secretary. The
conference passed a vote of no confidence in his policies.

Changes to pay, pensions, and workloads were also controversial. The NUT and
NASUWT staged strikes on a regional basis in October 2013, though a national
strike was averted. After talks failed, strike action affecting 10,000 schools
took place in March 2014. Sarah Vine, Gove's wife, accused socialists of sending
their family "vicious and aggressive" death threats due to Gove's education
reforms, and said that she had considered moving with their two children to
Italy as a result of said threats.

Before the coalition government, in 2010, a YouGov poll of teachers' voting
intentions found that 33% were Tory and 32% were Labour; four years later, a
poll found that only 16% were Tory and 57% were Labour.

On 15 July 2014, Gove's four-year stint in charge of the Department for
Education came to an end when he was replaced as Secretary of State for
Education by former Treasury Minister Nicky Morgan in a wide-ranging cabinet
reshuffle and moved to the post of Government Chief Whip. This was portrayed as
a demotion by his detractors, although Prime Minister David Cameron denied this
was the case. Gove told BBC News that he had mixed emotions about starting the
new role, saying it was a privilege to become Chief Whip but that leaving the
Department for Education was “a wrench”.

Following Gove's appointment as Chief Whip in July 2014, his first day in office
was marred by a defeat on an impromptu Opposition Ten Minute Rule Bill Division,
at which time Gove was speaking to Labour backbencher Bill Esterson outside the
toilets to the "Aye" lobby, prompting Shadow Commons Leader Angela Eagle to jibe
that "he not only lost his first vote but he managed to get stuck in the toilet
in the wrong lobby and he nearly broke his own whip". New Leader of the House,
William Hague, did not deny the incident took place, and light-heartedly
defended Gove by stating to the House: "Knowledge of who is in the toilets in
whatever Lobby is a very important piece of information for any Chief Whip and I
take this as evidence that he was carrying out his duties very assiduously".

After the 2015 general election, Prime Minister David Cameron promoted Gove as
Lord Chancellor and Justice Secretary in his newly formed Cabinet. He was
praised in December 2015 for scrapping the courts fee introduced by his
predecessor, Chris Grayling. The fee had been heavily criticised for, among
other things, causing innocent people to plead guilty out of financial concerns.
Gove also removed the 12-book limit on prison books introduced by Grayling,
arguing that books increased literacy and numeracy, skills needed for making
prisoners a "potential asset to society." The move, effective from September
2015, was welcomed by Frances Cook of the Howard League for Penal Reform. Gove
was also praised for his prominent role in scrapping a British bid for a Saudi
prison contract.

Within three months of his taking office, the Criminal Bar Association voted to
stop taking new work in protest at Gove's insistence that they work for lower
fees. The CBA subsequently praised his "courage" in reversing the proposed cuts.
On 14 July 2016 Gove was removed from the position of Justice Secretary under
the new Prime Minister Theresa May.

Over a five-month period between December 2005 and April 2006, Michael Gove
claimed more than £7,000 on a house bought with his wife Sarah Vine, a
journalist, in 2002. Around a third of the money was spent at OKA, an upmarket
interior design company established by Viscountess Astor, PM David Cameron’s
mother-in-law. Shortly afterwards he reportedly 'flipped' his designated second
home, a property for which he claimed around £13,000 to cover stamp duty. Gove
also claimed for a cot mattress, despite children's items being banned under
updated Commons Rules. Gove said he would repay the claim for the cot mattress,
but maintained that his other claims were "below the acceptable threshold costs
for furniture" and that moving house was necessary "to effectively discharge my
parliamentary duties". While he was moving between homes, on one occasion he
stayed at the Pennyhill Park Hotel and Spa following a constituency engagement,
charging the taxpayer more than £500 per night's stay.

Gove's second home was not in his constituency, but in Elstead, in the South
West Surrey constituency. Gove has sold the house and now commutes to his
constituency.

Gove has been the subject of repeated criticism for alleged attempts to avoid
the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act. The criticism surrounds Gove's
use of various private email accounts to send emails that allegedly relate to
his departmental responsibilities. The allegations suggest that Gove and his
advisers believed they could avoid their correspondence being subject to Freedom
of Information requests, as they believed that their private email accounts were
not subject to the Freedom of Information Act. In September 2011, the Financial
Times reported that Gove had used an undisclosed private email account – called
"Mrs Blurt" – to discuss government business with advisers. In March 2012 the
Information Commissioner ruled that because emails the Financial Times had
requested contained public information they could be the subject of a Freedom of
Information request and ordered the information requested by the paper to be
disclosed. Gove was also advised to cease the practice of using private email
accounts to conduct government business. Gove disputed the Information
Commissioner's ruling and proceeded to tribunal, costing taxpayers £12,540 in
fees for legal advice, but the appeal was withdrawn.

It was also alleged that Gove and his advisors had destroyed email
correspondence in order to avoid Freedom of Information requests. The allegation
was denied by Gove's department who stated that deleting email was simply part
of good computer housekeeping.

After David Cameron announced his intention to resign as Prime Minister, with
his successor now likely to be in office by September 2016, Gove was not a
candidate, having said in the past that he had no interest in becoming Prime
Minister. Instead, he was seen as a strong, highly influential supporter of
Boris Johnson for that role. In a move that surprised most political analysts,
Gove withdrew his support for Johnson on 30 June 2016, hours before the
deadline, without any previous notice to Johnson and announced his own candidacy
in the Conservative Party (UK) leadership election, 2016. Subsequently, Johnson
declined to run. The Daily Telegraph stated that Gove's actions in undermining
Johnson's leadership aspirations constituted "the most spectacular political
assassination in a generation" while The Guardian labelled it as a
"Machiavellian move".

Gove said: "I wanted to help build a team behind Boris Johnson so that a
politician who argued for leaving the European Union could lead us to a better
future. But I have come, reluctantly, to the conclusion that Boris cannot
provide the leadership or build the team for the task ahead. I have, therefore,
decided to put my name forward for the leadership. I want there to be an open
and positive debate about the path the country will now take. Whatever the
verdict of that debate I will respect it. In the next few days I will lay out my
plan for the United Kingdom which I hope can provide unity and change."

By 5 July 2016, Gove was in third place in the Conservative Party (UK)
leadership election, 2016 behind Theresa May and Andrea Leadsom; the latter had
gained an endorsement from Boris Johnson. Some political analysts predicted that
Gove might quit the race if he was unable to beat Leadsom in the first round of
voting. Later that day, it was announced that Theresa May won the first round of
voting, with support from 165 MPs, while Andrea Leadsom received 66 votes and
Gove trailed with 48.

Gove was eliminated in the second ballot after receiving only 46 votes, compared
to 199 for Theresa May and 84 for Andrea Leadsom. He subsequently told the media
that he was "naturally disappointed" and described his two opponents as
"formidable politicians", welcoming the fact that the next PM would be female.
He also encouraged a "civilised, inclusive, positive and optimistic debate".

In his capacity as a writer for The Times, Gove gave the first British
post-election interview to Donald Trump in January 2017, along with Kai Diekmann
from Bild, making him the second British politician to meet the President-elect
of the United States after Nigel Farage. Despite preferring Hillary Clinton to
Trump as President of the United States, Gove's interview and consequent defence
of it has been seen by some as praising the President-elect unduly, and a
photograph of Gove giving a "thumbs-up" to Trump was widely mocked on social
media.

In the interview, Trump claimed that he had a fondness for Great Britain due to
Scottish heritage on his mother's side. Trump also described his support for
Britain leaving the EU, describing the vote to leave as "so smart", and praised
the fall of the pound sterling. He promised a free trade deal for Britain
post-Brexit, although cabinet ministers warned Theresa May not to allow Trump to
rush into any trade deals which would not be mutually beneficial to the UK and
US.

Trump predicted that the EU would collapse as European countries could not cope
with a rapid influx of migrants and refugees, criticising German chancellor
Angela Merkel for allowing "all these illegals" to come into Germany, and
reiterated his previous comments that the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(NATO) was "obsolete" due to the fact that "a lot of these countries aren’t
paying what they’re supposed to be paying". These comments caused concern among
NATO members, but was praised by Dmitry Peskov, the press spokesman for Russian
President Vladimir Putin. However, Trump clarified that the alliance was
"important" to him as President-elect of the United States. Trump also said he
would consider removing US sanctions on Russia in exchange for Russia reducing
its stockpiles of nuclear weapons. He additionally suggested that the UK "should
look at" Christopher Steele, a former MI6 agent who investigated Trump's links
to the highest echelons of the Russian government.

Trump suggested an import tax of 35% on BMW cars if they relocated their
manufacturing plants to Mexico, and criticised the Obama administration's
policies on the Syrian Civil War and the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(Iran nuclear deal). Additionally, he suggested that social media was more
influential in getting his campaign covered the mainstream media, saying that
"[As president] I'd do less of it, but I'm covered so dishonestly by the press —
so dishonestly — that I can put out Twitter ... and as soon as I tweet it out —
this morning on television, Fox — 'Donald Trump, we have breaking news'."

Gove is generally considered as combining socially liberal views—e.g. on gay
marriage, race, and social mobility—with a harder Eurosceptic and
neoconservative position on foreign affairs. He has expressed his view that the
state should generally not interfere in domestic affairs and attests to have
campaigned for personal freedom in certain matters. Gove has argued that "the
only sustainable ethical foundation for society is a belief in the innate worth
and dignity of every individual." Giving evidence before the Leveson Inquiry in
May 2012, Gove said he was "unashamedly on the side of those who say that we
should think very carefully before legislation and regulation because the cry
'Something must be done' often leads to people doing something which isn't
always wise."

During the 2008 Conservative Party Conference, Gove argued that Edmund Burke, an
18th-century philosopher who commented on organic society and the French
Revolution, was the greatest conservative ever. When asked about those who
believe 'Marx was right all along', he responded that they were guilty of
ignoring the systematic abuses and poverty of centrally planned economies, and
criticised the historian Eric Hobsbawm, saying that "only when Hobsbawm weeps
hot tears for a life spent serving an ideology of wickedness will he ever be
worth listening to."

Gove described his decision to campaign for Britain to leave the EU in the EU
referendum as "the most difficult decision of my political life". He and his
family spent Christmas with the Camerons at Chequers where, according to Craig
Oliver, Cameron got the impression that Gove would support remaining in the EU.
He argued Britain would be "freer, fairer and better off" for leaving. When in
an interview it was claimed that there was no expert opinion to support this,
Gove remarked that "the people of this country have had enough of experts from
organizations with acronyms saying they know what is best and getting it
consistently wrong." However, interviewer Faisal Islam interrupted Gove after
the word "experts", causing some sources to report that he had made a general
statement that "the people.. have had enough of experts". In October 2016,
Bloomberg noted that sterling had performed worse post Brexit than even the
Argentinian peso leading a Guardian editorial to record that whatever else
happened, Gove and his fellow campaigners had earned a place in the record books
by making sterling even weaker than after Black Wednesday or the collapse of RBS
and HBOS.

Gove is one of several Conservative MPs who co-authored Direct Democracy: An
Agenda for a New Model Party (2005). The book says the NHS "fails to meet public
expectations" and calls for it to be dismantled and replaced with personal
health accounts. Gove fractured his foot in July 2015. His wife Sarah Vine
inaccurately complained in her Daily Mail column that he could not have his foot
X-rayed by the NHS because the minor injuries unit the couple visited did not
provide the facility at weekends. In December 2016 Gove repeated the
controversial Vote Leave claim that an additional £350 million a week could be
spent on the NHS when Britain left the EU but said it was up to the Government
to decide how to spend it.

The Financial Times describes Gove as having "strong neoconservative
convictions". He proposed that the invasion of Iraq would bring peace and
democracy both to Iraq and the wider Middle East. In December 2008, he wrote
that declarations of either victory or defeat in Iraq in 2003 were premature,
and that the liberation of Iraq was a foreign policy success.

Tariq Ali once recalled how, at the time of the Iraq War, he "debat[ed] the
ghastly Gove on television [... and found him] worse than most Bush apologists
in the United States."

He had to be calmed down by parliamentary colleagues in August 2013 after
shouting, "A disgrace, you're a disgrace!" at various Conservative and Liberal
Democrat rebels who contributed to defeating the coalition government's motion
to attack Syria in retaliation for the 2013 Ghouta attacks. He later claimed he
was reacting to the manner in which Labour MPs celebrated the outcome of the
vote.

Michael Gove has described himself as "a proud Zionist", and supports the United
Jewish Israel Appeal's fundraising activities.

William Dalrymple, reviewing Gove's book Celsius 7/7 in The Times, dismisses
Gove's knowledge of the Middle East as being derivative and based on the views
of Bernard Lewis. Gove distinguishes between "the great historical faith" of
Islam, which he says has "brought spiritual nourishment to millions", and
Islamism, a "totalitarian ideology" that turns to "hellish violence and
oppression," likening Islamism to Nazism and Communism.

In 2015, Gove cancelled a £5.9 million contract to provide services for prisons
in Saudi Arabia, according to The Guardian, because it was thought "the British
government should not be assisting a regime that uses beheadings, stoning,
crucifixions and lashings as forms of punishment." Foreign Secretary Philip
Hammond was reported to have accused Gove of being naive.

In a controversial article about the First World War centenary in January 2014,
Gove attacked academic and television interpretations of World War I as
"left-wing versions of the past designed to belittle Britain and its leaders."

Some of Gove's key points were rebuffed by the academics that Gove had used to
support his thesis. Gove had criticised Cambridge professor Sir Richard Evans
saying his views were more like that of an undergraduate cynic in a Footlights
review. Instead he urged people to listen to Margaret MacMillan of Oxford
University. MacMillan responded, saying "I agree with some of what Mr Gove says,
but he is mistaking myths for rival interpretations of history. I did not say,
as Mr Gove suggests, that British soldiers in the First World War were
consciously fighting for a western liberal order. They were just defending their
homeland and fighting what they saw as German militarism." Evans said Gove's
attack was "ignorant" and asked how anyone could possibly say Britons were
fighting for freedom given their country's main ally was Tsarist Russia. Jeremy
Paxman said Gove had "wilfully misquoted" Evans on the subject of the First
World War.

In 1997, Gove wrote in support of bringing back hanging as capital punishment,
which was abolished in the UK in 1965, although he has not repeated such views
since. Writing in The Times, Gove argued "Were I ever alone in the dock I would
not want to be arraigned before our flawed tribunals, knowing my freedom could
be forfeit as a result of political pressures. I would prefer a fair trial,
under the shadow of the noose."

Gove's proposal for a new Royal Yacht costing £60 million was made public in
January 2012. Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg criticised the idea, calling it
"a case of the haves and the have yachts". Gove believes that Scotland should
remain part of the United Kingdom, arguing that Scotland's strengths complement
those of other parts of the UK. He does not believe that the United States'
"current position in the world is analogous to that of an Imperial power, as we
have come to understand imperial powers". While deeply critical of Nazi Germany
and the Soviet Union, Gove believes that "there have also been more benign
empires, and in that I would include, almost pre-eminently, the British." In
March 2014, he described the concentration of Old Etonians at the top of the
Tory coalition as "ridiculous. I don't know where you can find a similar
situation in any other developed economy."

Gove stated he was "Christian and proud of it" at a talk to pupils at
Westminster School in 2012. Noting the singing of the "deliberately
anti-Catholic rant", the Famine Song at Rangers-Celtic matches, he credited
Cardinal Keith O'Brien with using his intellect to protect the vulnerable in
Scotland whilst regretting the absence of a similar figure in the Kirk.

Gove was behind plans to provide schools throughout England and Wales with a
copy of the King James Bible (inscribed "presented by the Secretary of State for
Education") to celebrate the 400th anniversary of its translation into English,
though he said he backed the scheme because of the historical and cultural
significance of that translation rather than on purely religious grounds.

Gove is married to Sarah Vine, who formerly wrote for The Times and in 2013
became a Daily Mail columnist. Gove's wealth was estimated in 2009, by the New
Statesman, at £1 million. Gove is a supporter of Queens Park Rangers Football
Club.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States

The United States of America, commonly referred to as the United States (U.S.)
or America, is a constitutional federal republic composed of 50 states, a
federal district, five major self-governing territories, and various
possessions.[fn 6] Forty-eight of the fifty states and the federal district are
contiguous and located in North America between Canada and Mexico. The state of
Alaska is in the northwest corner of North America, bordered by Canada to the
east and across the Bering Strait from Russia to the west. The state of Hawaii
is an archipelago in the mid-Pacific Ocean. The U.S. territories are scattered
about the Pacific Ocean and the Caribbean Sea. Nine time zones are covered. The
geography, climate and wildlife of the country are extremely diverse.

At 3.8 million square miles (9.8 million km2) and with over 324 million people,
the United States is the world's third- or fourth-largest country by total
area,[fn 7] third-largest by land area, and the third-most populous. It is one
of the world's most ethnically diverse and multicultural nations, and is home to
the world's largest immigrant population. The capital is Washington, D.C. and
the largest city is New York City; the other major metropolitan areas, all with
around five million or more inhabitants, are Los Angeles, Chicago, San
Francisco, Boston, Dallas, Philadelphia, Houston, Miami, and Atlanta.

Paleo-Indians migrated from Asia to the North American mainland at least 15,000
years ago. European colonization began in the 16th century. The United States
emerged from 13 British colonies along the East Coast. Numerous disputes between
Great Britain and the colonies following the Seven Years' War led to the
American Revolution, which began in 1775. On July 4, 1776, during the course of
the American Revolutionary War, the colonies unanimously adopted the Declaration
of Independence. The war ended in 1783 with recognition of the independence of
the United States by Great Britain, representing the first successful war of
independence against a European power. The current constitution was adopted in
1788, after the Articles of Confederation, adopted in 1781, were felt to have
provided inadequate federal powers. The first ten amendments, collectively named
the Bill of Rights, were ratified in 1791 and designed to guarantee many
fundamental civil liberties.

The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America
throughout the 19th century, displacing American Indian tribes, acquiring new
territories, and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent
by 1848. During the second half of the 19th century, the American Civil War led
to the end of legal slavery in the country. By the end of that century, the
United States extended into the Pacific Ocean, and its economy, driven in large
part by the Industrial Revolution, began to soar. The Spanish–American War and
World War I confirmed the country's status as a global military power. The
United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower, the first
country to develop nuclear weapons, the only country to use them in warfare, and
a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The end of the Cold
War and the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as
the world's sole superpower. The U.S. is a founding member of the United
Nations, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Organization of American
States (OAS), and other international organizations.

The United States is a highly developed country, with the world's largest
economy by nominal GDP and second-largest economy by PPP. It ranks highly in
several measures of socioeconomic performance, including average wage, human
development, per capita GDP, and productivity per person. While the U.S. economy
is considered post-industrial, characterized by the dominance of services and
knowledge economy, the manufacturing sector remains the second-largest in the
world. Though its population is only 4.3% of the world total, the United States
accounts for nearly a quarter of world GDP and over a third of global military
spending, making it the world's foremost economic and military power. The United
States is a prominent political and cultural force internationally, and a leader
in scientific research and technological innovations.

In 1507, the German cartographer Martin Waldseemüller produced a world map on
which he named the lands of the Western Hemisphere "America" after the Italian
explorer and cartographer Amerigo Vespucci (Latin: Americus Vespucius). The
first documentary evidence of the phrase "United States of America" is from a
letter dated January 2, 1776, written by Stephen Moylan, Esq., George
Washington's aide-de-camp and Muster-Master General of the Continental Army.
Addressed to Lt. Col. Joseph Reed, Moylan expressed his wish to carry the "full
and ample powers of the United States of America" to Spain to assist in the
revolutionary war effort.

The first known publication of the phrase "United States of America" was in an
anonymous essay in The Virginia Gazette newspaper in Williamsburg, Virginia, on
April 6, 1776. The second draft of the Articles of Confederation, prepared by
John Dickinson and completed by June 17, 1776, at the latest, declared "The name
of this Confederation shall be the 'United States of America.'" The final
version of the Articles sent to the states for ratification in late 1777
contains the sentence "The Stile of this Confederacy shall be 'The United States
of America'". In June 1776, Thomas Jefferson wrote the phrase "UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA" in all capitalized letters in the headline of his "original Rough
draught" of the Declaration of Independence. This draft of the document did not
surface until June 21, 1776, and it is unclear whether it was written before or
after Dickinson used the term in his June 17 draft of the Articles of
Confederation. In the final Fourth of July version of the Declaration, the title
was changed to read, "The unanimous Declaration of the thirteen united States of
America". The preamble of the Constitution states "...establish this
Constitution for the United States of America."

The short form "United States" is also standard. Other common forms are the
"U.S.", the "USA", and "America". Colloquial names are the "U.S. of A." and,
internationally, the "States". "Columbia", a name popular in poetry and songs of
the late 18th century, derives its origin from Christopher Columbus; it appears
in the name "District of Columbia". In non-English languages, the name is
frequently the translation of either the "United States" or "United States of
America", and colloquially as "America". In addition, an abbreviation (e.g. USA)
is sometimes used.

The phrase "United States" was originally plural, a description of a collection
of independent states—e.g., "the United States are"—including in the Thirteenth
Amendment to the United States Constitution, ratified in 1865. The singular
form—e.g., "the United States is"—became popular after the end of the American
Civil War. The singular form is now standard; the plural form is retained in the
idiom "these United States". The difference is more significant than usage; it
is a difference between a collection of states and a unit.

A citizen of the United States is an "American". "United States", "American" and
"U.S." refer to the country adjectivally ("American values", "U.S. forces").
"American" rarely refers to subjects not connected with the United States.

The first inhabitants of North America migrated from Siberia by way of the
Bering land bridge and arrived at least 15,000 years ago, though increasing
evidence suggests an even earlier arrival. Some, such as the pre-Columbian
Mississippian culture, developed advanced agriculture, grand architecture, and
state-level societies. After the Spanish conquistadors made the first contacts,
the native population declined for various reasons, primarily from diseases such
as smallpox and measles. Violence was not a significant factor in the overall
decline among Native Americans, though conflict among themselves and with
Europeans affected specific tribes and various colonial settlements. In the
Hawaiian Islands, the earliest indigenous inhabitants arrived around 1 AD from
Polynesia. Europeans under the British explorer Captain James Cook arrived in
the Hawaiian Islands in 1778.

In the early days of colonization, many European settlers were subject to food
shortages, disease, and attacks from Native Americans. Native Americans were
also often at war with neighboring tribes and allied with Europeans in their
colonial wars. At the same time, however, many natives and settlers came to
depend on each other. Settlers traded for food and animal pelts, natives for
guns, ammunition and other European wares. Natives taught many settlers where,
when and how to cultivate corn, beans and squash. European missionaries and
others felt it was important to "civilize" the Native Americans and urged them
to adopt European agricultural techniques and lifestyles.

After Spain sent Columbus on his first voyage to the New World in 1492, other
explorers followed. The Spanish set up small settlements in New Mexico and
Florida. France had several small settlements along the Mississippi River.
Successful English settlement on the eastern coast of North America began with
the Virginia Colony in 1607 at Jamestown and the Pilgrims' Plymouth Colony in
1620. Early experiments in communal living failed until the introduction of
private farm holdings. Many settlers were dissenting Christian groups who came
seeking religious freedom. The continent's first elected legislative assembly,
Virginia's House of Burgesses created in 1619, and the Mayflower Compact, signed
by the Pilgrims before disembarking, established precedents for the pattern of
representative self-government and constitutionalism that would develop
throughout the American colonies.

Most settlers in every colony were small farmers, but other industries developed
within a few decades as varied as the settlements. Cash crops included tobacco,
rice and wheat. Extraction industries grew up in furs, fishing and lumber.
Manufacturers produced rum and ships, and by the late colonial period Americans
were producing one-seventh of the world's iron supply. Cities eventually dotted
the coast to support local economies and serve as trade hubs. English colonists
were supplemented by waves of Scotch-Irish and other groups. As coastal land
grew more expensive freed indentured servants pushed further west.

Slave cultivation of cash crops began with the Spanish in the 1500s, and was
adopted by the English, but life expectancy was much higher in North America
because of less disease and better food and treatment, leading to a rapid
increase in the numbers of slaves. Colonial society was largely divided over the
religious and moral implications of slavery and colonies passed acts for and
against the practice. But by the turn of the 18th century, African slaves were
replacing indentured servants for cash crop labor, especially in southern
regions.

With the British colonization of Georgia in 1732, the 13 colonies that would
become the United States of America were established. All had local governments
with elections open to most free men, with a growing devotion to the ancient
rights of Englishmen and a sense of self-government stimulating support for
republicanism. With extremely high birth rates, low death rates, and steady
settlement, the colonial population grew rapidly. Relatively small Native
American populations were eclipsed. The Christian revivalist movement of the
1730s and 1740s known as the Great Awakening fueled interest in both religion
and religious liberty.

During the Seven Years' War (also known as the French and Indian War), British
forces seized Canada from the French, but the francophone population remained
politically isolated from the southern colonies. Excluding the Native Americans,
who were being conquered and displaced, those 13 colonies had a population of
over 2.1 million in 1770, about one-third that of Britain. Despite continuing
new arrivals, the rate of natural increase was such that by the 1770s only a
small minority of Americans had been born overseas. The colonies' distance from
Britain had allowed the development of self-government, but their success
motivated monarchs to periodically seek to reassert royal authority.

The American Revolutionary War was the first successful colonial war of
independence against a European power. Americans had developed an ideology of
"republicanism" asserting that government rested on the will of the people as
expressed in their local legislatures. They demanded their rights as Englishmen
and "no taxation without representation". The British insisted on administering
the empire through Parliament, and the conflict escalated into war.

Following the passage of the Lee Resolution, on July 2, 1776, which was the
actual vote for independence, the Second Continental Congress adopted the
Declaration of Independence on July 4, which proclaimed, in a long preamble,
that humanity is created equal in their unalienable rights and that those rights
were not being protected by Great Britain, and declared, in the words of the
resolution, that the Thirteen Colonies were independent states and had no
allegiance to the British crown in the United States. The fourth day of July is
celebrated annually as Independence Day. In 1777, the Articles of Confederation
established a weak government that operated until 1789.

Britain recognized the independence of the United States following their defeat
at Yorktown in 1781. In the peace treaty of 1783, American sovereignty was
recognized from the Atlantic coast west to the Mississippi River. Nationalists
led the Philadelphia Convention of 1787 in writing the United States
Constitution, ratified in state conventions in 1788. The federal government was
reorganized into three branches, on the principle of creating salutary checks
and balances, in 1789. George Washington, who had led the revolutionary army to
victory, was the first president elected under the new constitution. The Bill of
Rights, forbidding federal restriction of personal freedoms and guaranteeing a
range of legal protections, was adopted in 1791.

Although the federal government criminalized the international slave trade in
1808, after 1820, cultivation of the highly profitable cotton crop exploded in
the Deep South, and along with it, the slave population. The Second Great
Awakening, especially 1800–1840, converted millions to evangelical
Protestantism. In the North, it energized multiple social reform movements,
including abolitionism; in the South, Methodists and Baptists proselytized among
slave populations.

Americans' eagerness to expand westward prompted a long series of American
Indian Wars. The Louisiana Purchase of French-claimed territory in 1803 almost
doubled the nation's area. The War of 1812, declared against Britain over
various grievances and fought to a draw, strengthened U.S. nationalism. A series
of military incursions into Florida led Spain to cede it and other Gulf Coast
territory in 1819. Expansion was aided by steam power, when steamboats began
traveling along America's large water systems, which were connected by new
canals, such as the Erie and the I&M; then, even faster railroads began their
stretch across the nation's land.

From 1820 to 1850, Jacksonian democracy began a set of reforms which included
wider white male suffrage; it led to the rise of the Second Party System of
Democrats and Whigs as the dominant parties from 1828 to 1854. The Trail of
Tears in the 1830s exemplified the Indian removal policy that resettled Indians
into the west on Indian reservations. The U.S. annexed the Republic of Texas in
1845 during a period of expansionist Manifest destiny. The 1846 Oregon Treaty
with Britain led to U.S. control of the present-day American Northwest. Victory
in the Mexican–American War resulted in the 1848 Mexican Cession of California
and much of the present-day American Southwest.

The California Gold Rush of 1848–49 spurred western migration and the creation
of additional western states. After the American Civil War, new transcontinental
railways made relocation easier for settlers, expanded internal trade and
increased conflicts with Native Americans. Over a half-century, the loss of the
American bison (sometimes called "buffalo") was an existential blow to many
Plains Indians cultures. In 1869, a new Peace Policy sought to protect
Native-Americans from abuses, avoid further war, and secure their eventual U.S.
citizenship, although conflicts, including several of the largest Indian Wars,
continued throughout the West into the 1900s.

Differences of opinion and social order between northern and southern states in
early United States society, particularly regarding Black slavery, ultimately
led to the American Civil War. Initially, states entering the Union alternated
between slave and free states, keeping a sectional balance in the Senate, while
free states outstripped slave states in population and in the House of
Representatives. But with additional western territory and more free-soil
states, tensions between slave and free states mounted with arguments over
federalism and disposition of the territories, whether and how to expand or
restrict slavery.

With the 1860 election of Abraham Lincoln, the first president from the largely
anti-slavery Republican Party, conventions in thirteen slave states ultimately
declared secession and formed the Confederate States of America, while the
federal government maintained that secession was illegal. The ensuing war was at
first for Union, then after 1863 as casualties mounted and Lincoln delivered his
Emancipation Proclamation, a second war aim became abolition of slavery. The war
remains the deadliest military conflict in American history, resulting in the
deaths of approximately 618,000 soldiers as well as many civilians.

Following the Union victory in 1865, three amendments were added to the U.S.
Constitution: the Thirteenth Amendment prohibited slavery, the Fourteenth
Amendment provided citizenship to the nearly four million African Americans who
had been slaves, and the Fifteenth Amendment ensured that they had the right to
vote. The war and its resolution led to a substantial increase in federal power
aimed at reintegrating and rebuilding the Southern states while ensuring the
rights of the newly freed slaves.

Southern white conservatives, calling themselves "Redeemers" took control after
the end of Reconstruction. By the 1890–1910 period Jim Crow laws disenfranchised
most blacks and some poor whites. Blacks faced racial segregation, especially in
the South. Racial minorities occasionally experienced vigilante violence.

In the North, urbanization and an unprecedented influx of immigrants from
Southern and Eastern Europe supplied a surplus of labor for the country's
industrialization and transformed its culture. National infrastructure including
telegraph and transcontinental railroads spurred economic growth and greater
settlement and development of the American Old West. The later invention of
electric light and the telephone would also affect communication and urban life.

The end of the Indian Wars further expanded acreage under mechanical
cultivation, increasing surpluses for international markets. Mainland expansion
was completed by the purchase of Alaska from Russia in 1867. In 1893,
pro-American elements in Hawaii overthrew the monarchy and formed the Republic
of Hawaii, which the U.S. annexed in 1898. Puerto Rico, Guam, and the
Philippines were ceded by Spain in the same year, following the Spanish–American
War.

Rapid economic development during the late 19th and early 20th centuries
fostered the rise of many prominent industrialists. Tycoons like Cornelius
Vanderbilt, John D. Rockefeller, and Andrew Carnegie led the nation's progress
in railroad, petroleum, and steel industries. Banking became a major part of the
economy, with J. P. Morgan playing a notable role. Edison and Tesla undertook
the widespread distribution of electricity to industry, homes, and for street
lighting. Henry Ford revolutionized the automotive industry. The American
economy boomed, becoming the world's largest, and the United States achieved
great power status. These dramatic changes were accompanied by social unrest and
the rise of populist, socialist, and anarchist movements. This period eventually
ended with the advent of the Progressive Era, which saw significant reforms in
many societal areas, including women's suffrage, alcohol prohibition, regulation
of consumer goods, greater antitrust measures to ensure competition and
attention to worker conditions.

The United States remained neutral from the outbreak of World War I, in 1914,
until 1917 when it joined the war as an "associated power", alongside the formal
Allies of World War I, helping to turn the tide against the Central Powers. In
1919, President Woodrow Wilson took a leading diplomatic role at the Paris Peace
Conference and advocated strongly for the U.S. to join the League of Nations.
However, the Senate refused to approve this, and did not ratify the Treaty of
Versailles that established the League of Nations.

In 1920, the women's rights movement won passage of a constitutional amendment
granting women's suffrage. The 1920s and 1930s saw the rise of radio for mass
communication and the invention of early television. The prosperity of the
Roaring Twenties ended with the Wall Street Crash of 1929 and the onset of the
Great Depression. After his election as president in 1932, Franklin D. Roosevelt
responded with the New Deal, which included the establishment of the Social
Security system. The Great Migration of millions of African Americans out of the
American South began before World War I and extended through the 1960s; whereas
the Dust Bowl of the mid-1930s impoverished many farming communities and spurred
a new wave of western migration.

At first effectively neutral during World War II while Germany conquered much of
continental Europe, the United States began supplying material to the Allies in
March 1941 through the Lend-Lease program. On December 7, 1941, the Empire of
Japan launched a surprise attack on Pearl Harbor, prompting the United States to
join the Allies against the Axis powers. During the war, the United States was
referred as one of the "Four Policemen" of Allies power who met to plan the
postwar world, along with Britain, the Soviet Union and China. Though the nation
lost more than 400,000 soldiers, it emerged relatively undamaged from the war
with even greater economic and military influence.

The United States played a leading role in the Bretton Woods and Yalta
conferences with the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union and other Allies, which
signed agreements on new international financial institutions and Europe's
postwar reorganization. As an Allied victory was won in Europe, a 1945
international conference held in San Francisco produced the United Nations
Charter, which became active after the war. The United States developed the
first nuclear weapons and used them on Japan in the cities of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki; causing the Japanese to surrender on September 2, ending World War II.
Parades and celebrations followed in what is known as Victory Day, or V-J Day.

After World War II the United States and the Soviet Union jockeyed for power
during what became known as the Cold War, driven by an ideological divide
between capitalism and communism and, according to the school of geopolitics, a
divide between the maritime Atlantic and the continental Eurasian camps. They
dominated the military affairs of Europe, with the U.S. and its NATO allies on
one side and the USSR and its Warsaw Pact allies on the other. The U.S.
developed a policy of containment towards the expansion of communist influence.
While the U.S. and Soviet Union engaged in proxy wars and developed powerful
nuclear arsenals, the two countries avoided direct military conflict.

The United States often opposed Third World movements that it viewed as
Soviet-sponsored. American troops fought communist Chinese and North Korean
forces in the Korean War of 1950–53. The Soviet Union's 1957 launch of the first
artificial satellite and its 1961 launch of the first manned spaceflight
initiated a "Space Race" in which the United States became the first nation to
land a man on the moon in 1969. A proxy war in Southeast Asia eventually evolved
into full American participation, as the Vietnam War.

At home, the U.S. experienced sustained economic expansion and a rapid growth of
its population and middle class. Construction of an Interstate Highway System
transformed the nation's infrastructure over the following decades. Millions
moved from farms and inner cities to large suburban housing developments. In
1959 Hawaii became the 50th and last U.S. state added to the country. The
growing Civil Rights Movement used nonviolence to confront segregation and
discrimination, with Martin Luther King Jr. becoming a prominent leader and
figurehead. A combination of court decisions and legislation, culminating in the
Civil Rights Act of 1968, sought to end racial discrimination. Meanwhile, a
counterculture movement grew which was fueled by opposition to the Vietnam war,
black nationalism, and the sexual revolution.

The launch of a "War on Poverty" expanded entitlements and welfare spending,
including the creation of Medicare and Medicaid, two programs that provide
health coverage to the elderly and poor, respectively, and the means-tested Food
Stamp Program and Aid to Families with Dependent Children.

The 1970s and early 1980s saw the onset of stagflation. After his election in
1980, President Ronald Reagan responded to economic stagnation with free-market
oriented reforms. Following the collapse of détente, he abandoned "containment"
and initiated the more aggressive "rollback" strategy towards the USSR. After a
surge in female labor participation over the previous decade, by 1985 the
majority of women aged 16 and over were employed.

The late 1980s brought a "thaw" in relations with the USSR, and its collapse in
1991 finally ended the Cold War. This brought about unipolarity with the U.S.
unchallenged as the world's dominant superpower. The concept of Pax Americana,
which had appeared in the post-World War II period, gained wide popularity as a
term for the post-Cold War new world order.

After the Cold War, the conflict in the Middle East triggered a crisis in 1990,
when Iraq under Sadaam Hussein invaded and attempted to annex Kuwait, an ally of
the United States. Fearing that the instability would spread to other regions,
President George H.W. Bush launched Operation Desert Shield, a defensive force
buildup in Saudi Arabia, and Operation Desert Storm, in a staging titled the
Gulf War; waged by coalition forces from 34 nations, led by the United States
against Iraq ending in the successful expulsion of Iraqi forces from Kuwait,
restoring the former monarchy.

Originating in U.S. defense networks, the Internet spread to international
academic networks, and then to the public in the 1990s, greatly affecting the
global economy, society, and culture.

Due to the dot-com boom, stable monetary policy under Alan Greenspan, and
reduced social welfare spending, the 1990s saw the longest economic expansion in
modern U.S. history, ending in 2001. Beginning in 1994, the U.S. entered into
the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), linking 450 million people
producing $17 trillion worth of goods and services. The goal of the agreement
was to eliminate trade and investment barriers among the U.S., Canada, and
Mexico by January 1, 2008. Trade among the three partners has soared since NAFTA
went into force.

On September 11, 2001, Al-Qaeda terrorists struck the World Trade Center in New
York City and the Pentagon near Washington, D.C., killing nearly 3,000 people.
In response, the United States launched the War on Terror, which included war in
Afghanistan and the 2003–11 Iraq War. In 2007, the Bush administration ordered a
major troop surge in the Iraq War, which successfully reduced violence and led
to greater stability in the region.

Government policy designed to promote affordable housing, widespread failures in
corporate and regulatory governance, and historically low interest rates set by
the Federal Reserve led to the mid-2000s housing bubble, which culminated with
the 2008 financial crisis, the largest economic contraction in the nation's
history since the Great Depression. Barack Obama, the first African American and
multiracial president, was elected in 2008 amid the crisis, and subsequently
passed stimulus measures and the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer
Protection Act in an attempt to mitigate its negative effects. While the
stimulus facilitated infrastructure improvements and a relative decline in
unemployment, Dodd-Frank has had a negative impact on business investment and
small banks.

In 2010, the Obama administration passed the Affordable Care Act, which made the
most sweeping reforms to the nation's healthcare system in nearly five decades,
including mandates, subsidies and insurance exchanges. The law caused a
significant reduction in the number and percentage of people without health
insurance, with 24 million covered during 2016, but remains controversial due to
its impact on healthcare costs, insurance premiums, and economic performance.
Although the recession reached its trough in June 2009, voters remained
frustrated with the slow pace of the economic recovery. The Republicans, who
stood in opposition to Obama's policies, won control of the House of
Representatives with a landslide in 2010 and control of the Senate in 2014.

American forces in Iraq were withdrawn in large numbers in 2009 and 2010, and
the war in the region was declared formally over in December 2011. The
withdrawal caused an escalation of sectarian insurgency, leading to the rise of
the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, the successor of al-Qaeda in the
region. In 2014, Obama announced a restoration of full diplomatic relations with
Cuba for the first time since 1961. The next year, the United States as a member
of the P5+1 countries signed the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, an
agreement aimed to slow the development of Iran's nuclear program.

Donald Trump, the wealthiest president in U.S. history and the first president
with no political or military experience prior to taking office, was elected to
office in the 2016 presidential election.

The land area of the contiguous United States is 2,959,064 square miles
(7,663,940.6 km2). Alaska, separated from the contiguous United States by
Canada, is the largest state at 663,268 square miles (1,717,856.2 km2). Hawaii,
occupying an archipelago in the central Pacific, southwest of North America, is
10,931 square miles (28,311 km2) in area. The populated territories of Puerto
Rico, American Samoa, Guam, Northern Mariana Islands, and U.S. Virgin Islands
together cover 9,185 square miles (23,789 km2).

The United States is the world's third- or fourth-largest nation by total area
(land and water), ranking behind Russia and Canada and just above or below
China. The ranking varies depending on how two territories disputed by China and
India are counted and how the total size of the United States is measured:
calculations range from 3,676,486 square miles (9,522,055.0 km2) to 3,717,813
square miles (9,629,091.5 km2) to 3,796,742 square miles (9,833,516.6 km2) to
3,805,927 square miles (9,857,306 km2). Measured by only land area, the United
States is third in size behind Russia and China, just ahead of Canada.

The coastal plain of the Atlantic seaboard gives way further inland to deciduous
forests and the rolling hills of the Piedmont. The Appalachian Mountains divide
the eastern seaboard from the Great Lakes and the grasslands of the Midwest. The
Mississippi–Missouri River, the world's fourth longest river system, runs mainly
north–south through the heart of the country. The flat, fertile prairie of the
Great Plains stretches to the west, interrupted by a highland region in the
southeast.

The Rocky Mountains, at the western edge of the Great Plains, extend north to
south across the country, reaching altitudes higher than 14,000 feet (4,300 m)
in Colorado. Farther west are the rocky Great Basin and deserts such as the
Chihuahua and Mojave. The Sierra Nevada and Cascade mountain ranges run close to
the Pacific coast, both ranges reaching altitudes higher than 14,000 feet
(4,300 m). The lowest and highest points in the contiguous United States are in
the state of California, and only about 84 miles (135 km) apart. At an elevation
of 20,310 feet (6,190.5 m), Alaska's Denali (Mount McKinley) is the highest peak
in the country and North America. Active volcanoes are common throughout
Alaska's Alexander and Aleutian Islands, and Hawaii consists of volcanic
islands. The supervolcano underlying Yellowstone National Park in the Rockies is
the continent's largest volcanic feature.

The United States, with its large size and geographic variety, includes most
climate types. To the east of the 100th meridian, the climate ranges from humid
continental in the north to humid subtropical in the south. The Great Plains
west of the 100th meridian are semi-arid. Much of the Western mountains have an
alpine climate. The climate is arid in the Great Basin, desert in the Southwest,
Mediterranean in coastal California, and oceanic in coastal Oregon and
Washington and southern Alaska. Most of Alaska is subarctic or polar. Hawaii and
the southern tip of Florida are tropical, as are the populated territories in
the Caribbean and the Pacific. Extreme weather is not uncommon—the states
bordering the Gulf of Mexico are prone to hurricanes, and most of the world's
tornadoes occur within the country, mainly in Tornado Alley areas in the Midwest
and South.

The U.S. ecology is megadiverse: about 17,000 species of vascular plants occur
in the contiguous United States and Alaska, and over 1,800 species of flowering
plants are found in Hawaii, few of which occur on the mainland. The United
States is home to 428 mammal species, 784 bird species, 311 reptile species, and
295 amphibian species. About 91,000 insect species have been described. The bald
eagle is both the national bird and national animal of the United States, and is
an enduring symbol of the country itself.

There are 58 national parks and hundreds of other federally managed parks,
forests, and wilderness areas. Altogether, the government owns about 28% of the
country's land area. Most of this is protected, though some is leased for oil
and gas drilling, mining, logging, or cattle ranching; about .86% is used for
military purposes.

Environmental issues have been on the national agenda since 1970. Environmental
controversies include debates on oil and nuclear energy, dealing with air and
water pollution, the economic costs of protecting wildlife, logging and
deforestation, and international responses to global warming. Many federal and
state agencies are involved. The most prominent is the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), created by presidential order in 1970. The idea of wilderness has
shaped the management of public lands since 1964, with the Wilderness Act. The
Endangered Species Act of 1973 is intended to protect threatened and endangered
species and their habitats, which are monitored by the United States Fish and
Wildlife Service.

The U.S. Census Bureau estimated the country's population to be 323,425,550 as
of April 25, 2016, and to be adding 1 person (net gain) every 13 seconds, or
about 6,646 people per day. The U.S. population almost quadrupled during the
20th century, from about 76 million in 1900. The third most populous nation in
the world, after China and India, the United States is the only major
industrialized nation in which large population increases are projected. In the
1800s the average woman had 7.04 children, by the 1900s this number had
decreased to 3.56. Since the early 1970s the birth rate has been below the
replacement rate of 2.1 with 1.86 children per woman in 2014. Foreign born
immigration has caused the US population to continue its rapid increase with the
foreign born population doubling from almost 20 million in 1990 to over 40
million in 2010, representing one third of the population increase. The foreign
born population reached 45 million in 2015.[fn 8]

The United States has a birth rate of 13 per 1,000, which is 5 births below the
world average. Its population growth rate is positive at 0.7%, higher than that
of many developed nations. In fiscal year 2012, over one million immigrants
(most of whom entered through family reunification) were granted legal
residence. Mexico has been the leading source of new residents since the 1965
Immigration Act. China, India, and the Philippines have been in the top four
sending countries every year since the 1990s. As of 2012[update], approximately
11.4 million residents are illegal immigrants. As of 2015, 47% of all immigrants
are Hispanic, 26% are Asian, 18% are white and 8% are black. The percentage of
immigrants who are Asian is increasing while the percentage who are Hispanic is
decreasing.

According to a survey conducted by the Williams Institute, nine million
Americans, or roughly 3.4% of the adult population identify themselves as
homosexual, bisexual, or transgender. A 2016 Gallup poll also concluded that
4.1% of adult Americans identified as LGBT. The highest percentage came from the
District of Columbia (10%), while the lowest state was North Dakota at 1.7%. In
a 2013 survey, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found that 96.6%
of Americans identify as straight, while 1.6% identify as gay or lesbian, and
0.7% identify as being bisexual.

In 2010, the U.S. population included an estimated 5.2 million people with some
American Indian or Alaska Native ancestry (2.9 million exclusively of such
ancestry) and 1.2 million with some native Hawaiian or Pacific island ancestry
(0.5 million exclusively). The census counted more than 19 million people of
"Some Other Race" who were "unable to identify with any" of its five official
race categories in 2010, over 18.5 million (97%) of whom are of Hispanic
ethnicity.

The population growth of Hispanic and Latino Americans (the terms are officially
interchangeable) is a major demographic trend. The 50.5 million Americans of
Hispanic descent are identified as sharing a distinct "ethnicity" by the Census
Bureau; 64% of Hispanic Americans are of Mexican descent. Between 2000 and 2010,
the country's Hispanic population increased 43% while the non-Hispanic
population rose just 4.9%. Much of this growth is from immigration; in 2007,
12.6% of the U.S. population was foreign-born, with 54% of that figure born in
Latin America.[fn 9]

About 82% of Americans live in urban areas (including suburbs); about half of
those reside in cities with populations over 50,000. The US has numerous
clusters of cities known as megaregions, the largest being the Great Lakes
Megalopolis followed by the Northeast Megalopolis and Southern California. In
2008, 273 incorporated municipalities had populations over 100,000, nine cities
had more than one million residents, and four global cities had over two million
(New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, and Houston). There are 52 metropolitan areas
with populations greater than one million. Of the 50 fastest-growing metro
areas, 47 are in the West or South. The metro areas of San Bernardino, Dallas,
Houston, Atlanta, and Phoenix all grew by more than a million people between
2000 and 2008.

English (American English) is the de facto national language. Although there is
no official language at the federal level, some laws—such as U.S. naturalization
requirements—standardize English. In 2010, about 230 million, or 80% of the
population aged five years and older, spoke only English at home. Spanish,
spoken by 12% of the population at home, is the second most common language and
the most widely taught second language. Some Americans advocate making English
the country's official language, as it is in 32 states.

Both Hawaiian and English are official languages in Hawaii, by state law. Alaska
recognizes twenty Native languages. While neither has an official language, New
Mexico has laws providing for the use of both English and Spanish, as Louisiana
does for English and French. Other states, such as California, mandate the
publication of Spanish versions of certain government documents including court
forms. Many jurisdictions with large numbers of non-English speakers produce
government materials, especially voting information, in the most commonly spoken
languages in those jurisdictions.

Several insular territories grant official recognition to their native
languages, along with English: Samoan and Chamorro are recognized by American
Samoa and Guam, respectively; Carolinian and Chamorro are recognized by the
Northern Mariana Islands; Cherokee is officially recognized by the Cherokee
Nation within the Cherokee tribal jurisdiction area in eastern Oklahoma; Spanish
is an official language of Puerto Rico and is more widely spoken than English
there.

According to the Center for Immigration Studies, Arabic and Urdu are the
fastest-growing foreign languages spoken in American households. In recent
years, Arabic-speaking residents increased by 29%, Urdu by 23% and Persian by
9%.

The most widely taught foreign languages at all levels in the United States (in
terms of enrollment numbers) are: Spanish (around 7.2 million students), French
(1.5 million), and German (500,000). Other commonly taught languages (with
100,000 to 250,000 learners) include Latin, Japanese, American Sign Language,
Italian, and Chinese. 18% of all Americans claim to speak at least one language
in addition to English.

The First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution guarantees the free exercise of
religion and forbids Congress from passing laws respecting its establishment.

Christianity is by far the most common religion practiced in the U.S., but other
religions are followed, too. In a 2013 survey, 56% of Americans said that
religion played a "very important role in their lives", a far higher figure than
that of any other wealthy nation. In a 2009 Gallup poll, 42% of Americans said
that they attended church weekly or almost weekly; the figures ranged from a low
of 23% in Vermont to a high of 63% in Mississippi.

As with other Western countries, the U.S. is becoming less religious. Irreligion
is growing rapidly among Americans under 30. Polls show that overall American
confidence in organized religion has been declining since the mid to late 1980s,
and that younger Americans in particular are becoming increasingly irreligious.
According to a 2012 study, Protestant share of U.S. population dropped to 48%,
thus ending its status as religious category of the majority for the first time.
Americans with no religion have 1.7 children compared to 2.2 among Christians.
The unaffiliated are less likely to get married with 37% marrying compared to
52% of Christians.

According to a 2014 survey, 70.6% of adults identified themselves as Christian,
Protestant denominations accounted for 46.5%, while Roman Catholicism, at 20.8%,
was the largest individual denomination. The total reporting non-Christian
religions in 2014 was 5.9%. Other religions include Judaism (1.9%), Islam
(0.9%), Buddhism (0.7%), Hinduism (0.7%). The survey also reported that 22.8% of
Americans described themselves as agnostic, atheist or simply having no
religion, up from 8.2% in 1990. There are also Unitarian Universalist, Baha'i,
Sikh, Jain, Shinto, Confucian, Taoist, Druid, Native American, Wiccan, humanist
and deist communities.

Protestantism is the largest Christian religious grouping in the United States.
Baptists collectively form the largest branch of Protestantism, and the Southern
Baptist Convention is the largest individual Protestant denomination. About 26%
of Americans identify as Evangelical Protestants, while 15% are Mainline and 7%
belong to a traditionally Black church. Roman Catholicism in the United States
has its origin in the Spanish and French colonization of the Americas, and later
grew because of Irish, Italian, Polish, German and Hispanic immigration. Rhode
Island has the highest percentage of Catholics with 40 percent of the total
population. Lutheranism in the U.S. has its origin in immigration from Northern
Europe and Germany. North and South Dakota are the only states in which a
plurality of the population is Lutheran. Presbyterianism was introduced in North
America by Scottish and Ulster Scots immigrants. Although it has spread across
the United States, it is heavily concentrated on the East Coast. Dutch Reformed
congregations were founded first in New Amsterdam (New York City) before
spreading westward. Utah is the only state where Mormonism is the religion of
the majority of the population. The Mormon Corridor also extends to parts of
Idaho, Nevada and Wyoming.

The Bible Belt is an informal term for a region in the Southern United States in
which socially conservative Evangelical Protestantism is a significant part of
the culture and Christian church attendance across the denominations is
generally higher than the nation's average. By contrast, religion plays the
least important role in New England and in the Western United States.

As of 2007[update], 58% of Americans age 18 and over were married, 6% were
widowed, 10% were divorced, and 25% had never been married. Women now work
mostly outside the home and receive a majority of bachelor's degrees.

The U.S. teenage pregnancy rate is 26.5 per 1,000 women. The rate has declined
by 57% since 1991. In 2013, the highest teenage birth rate was in Alabama, and
the lowest in Wyoming. Abortion is legal throughout the U.S., owing to Roe v.
Wade, a 1973 landmark decision by the Supreme Court of the United States. While
the abortion rate is falling, the abortion ratio of 241 per 1,000 live births
and abortion rate of 15 per 1,000 women aged 15–44 remain higher than those of
most Western nations. In 2013, the average age at first birth was 26 and 40.6%
of births were to unmarried women.

The total fertility rate (TFR) was estimated for 2013 at 1.86 births per woman.
Adoption in the United States is common and relatively easy from a legal point
of view (compared to other Western countries). In 2001, with over 127,000
adoptions, the U.S. accounted for nearly half of the total number of adoptions
worldwide. Same-sex marriage is legal nationwide and it is legal for same-sex
couples to adopt. Polygamy is illegal throughout the U.S.

The United States is the world's oldest surviving federation. It is a
constitutional republic and representative democracy, "in which majority rule is
tempered by minority rights protected by law". The government is regulated by a
system of checks and balances defined by the U.S. Constitution, which serves as
the country's supreme legal document. For 2016, the U.S. ranked 21st on the
Democracy Index (tied with Italy) and 18th on the Corruption Perceptions Index.

In the American federalist system, citizens are usually subject to three levels
of government: federal, state, and local. The local government's duties are
commonly split between county and municipal governments. In almost all cases,
executive and legislative officials are elected by a plurality vote of citizens
by district. There is no proportional representation at the federal level, and
it is rare at lower levels.

The House of Representatives has 435 voting members, each representing a
congressional district for a two-year term. House seats are apportioned among
the states by population every tenth year. At the 2010 census, seven states had
the minimum of one representative, while California, the most populous state,
had 53.

The Senate has 100 members with each state having two senators, elected at-large
to six-year terms; one third of Senate seats are up for election every other
year. The President serves a four-year term and may be elected to the office no
more than twice. The President is not elected by direct vote, but by an indirect
electoral college system in which the determining votes are apportioned to the
states and the District of Columbia. The Supreme Court, led by the Chief Justice
of the United States, has nine members, who serve for life. However, the court
currently has one vacant seat after the death of Associate Justice Antonin
Scalia.

The state governments are structured in roughly similar fashion; Nebraska
uniquely has a unicameral legislature. The governor (chief executive) of each
state is directly elected. Some state judges and cabinet officers are appointed
by the governors of the respective states, while others are elected by popular
vote.

The original text of the Constitution establishes the structure and
responsibilities of the federal government and its relationship with the
individual states. Article One protects the right to the "great writ" of habeas
corpus. The Constitution has been amended 27 times; the first ten amendments,
which make up the Bill of Rights, and the Fourteenth Amendment form the central
basis of Americans' individual rights. All laws and governmental procedures are
subject to judicial review and any law ruled by the courts to be in violation of
the Constitution is voided. The principle of judicial review, not explicitly
mentioned in the Constitution, was established by the Supreme Court in Marbury
v. Madison (1803) in a decision handed down by Chief Justice John Marshall.

The United States is a federal republic of 50 states, a federal district, five
territories and eleven uninhabited island possessions. The states and
territories are the principal administrative districts in the country. These are
divided into subdivisions of counties and independent cities. The District of
Columbia is a federal district which contains the capital of the United States,
Washington DC. The states and the District of Columbia choose the President of
the United States. Each state has presidential electors equal to the number of
their Representatives and Senators in Congress; the District of Columbia has
three.

Congressional Districts are reapportioned among the states following each
decennial Census of Population. Each state then draws single member districts to
conform with the census apportionment. The total number of Representatives is
435, and delegate Members of Congress represent the District of Columbia and the
five major U.S. territories.

The United States also observes tribal sovereignty of the American Indian
nations to a limited degree, as it does with the states' sovereignty. American
Indians are U.S. citizens and tribal lands are subject to the jurisdiction of
the U.S. Congress and the federal courts. Like the states they have a great deal
of autonomy, but also like the states tribes are not allowed to make war, engage
in their own foreign relations, or print and issue currency.

The United States has operated under a two-party system for most of its history.
For elective offices at most levels, state-administered primary elections choose
the major party nominees for subsequent general elections. Since the general
election of 1856, the major parties have been the Democratic Party, founded in
1824, and the Republican Party, founded in 1854. Since the Civil War, only one
third-party presidential candidate—former president Theodore Roosevelt, running
as a Progressive in 1912—has won as much as 20% of the popular vote. The
President and Vice-president are elected through the Electoral College system.

Within American political culture, the center-right Republican Party is
considered "conservative" and the center-left Democratic Party is considered
"liberal". The states of the Northeast and West Coast and some of the Great
Lakes states, known as "blue states", are relatively liberal. The "red states"
of the South and parts of the Great Plains and Rocky Mountains are relatively
conservative.

Republican Donald Trump, the winner of the 2016 presidential election, is
currently serving as the 45th President of the United States. Current leadership
in the Senate includes Republican Vice President Michael Pence, Republican
President Pro Tempore (Pro Tem) Orrin Hatch, Majority Leader Mitch McConnell,
and Minority Leader Chuck Schumer. Leadership in the House includes Speaker of
the House Paul Ryan, Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, and Minority Leader Nancy
Pelosi.

In the 115th United States Congress, both the House of Representatives and the
Senate are controlled by the Republican Party. The Senate currently consists of
52 Republicans, and 46 Democrats with 2 Independents who caucus with the
Democrats; the House consists of 241 Republicans and 194 Democrats. In state
governorships, there are 31 Republicans, 18 Democrats and 1 Independent. Among
the DC mayor and the 5 territorial governors, there are 2 Republicans, 1
Democrat, 1 Popular Democrat, and 2 Independents.

The United States has an established structure of foreign relations. It is a
permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, and New York City is
home to the United Nations Headquarters. It is a member of the G7, G20, and
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Almost all countries
have embassies in Washington, D.C., and many have consulates around the country.
Likewise, nearly all nations host American diplomatic missions. However, Iran,
North Korea, Bhutan, and the Republic of China (Taiwan) do not have formal
diplomatic relations with the United States (although the U.S. still maintains
relations with Taiwan and supplies it with military equipment).

The United States has a "Special Relationship" with the United Kingdom and
strong ties with Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the Philippines, Japan, South
Korea, Israel, and several European Union countries, including France, Italy,
Germany, and Spain. It works closely with fellow NATO members on military and
security issues and with its neighbors through the Organization of American
States and free trade agreements such as the trilateral North American Free
Trade Agreement with Canada and Mexico. In 2008, the United States spent a net
$25.4 billion on official development assistance, the most in the world. As a
share of America's large gross national income (GNI), however, the U.S.
contribution of 0.18% ranked last among 22 donor states. By contrast, private
overseas giving by Americans is relatively generous.

The U.S. exercises full international defense authority and responsibility for
three sovereign nations through Compact of Free Association with Micronesia, the
Marshall Islands and Palau. These are Pacific island nations, once part of the
U.S.-administered Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands after World War II,
which gained independence in subsequent years.

Taxes in the United States are levied at the federal, state and local government
level. These include taxes on income, payroll, property, sales, imports, estates
and gifts, as well as various fees. In 2010 taxes collected by federal, state
and municipal governments amounted to 24.8% of GDP. During FY2012, the federal
government collected approximately $2.45 trillion in tax revenue, up $147
billion or 6% versus FY2011 revenues of $2.30 trillion. Primary receipt
categories included individual income taxes ($1,132B or 47%), Social
Security/Social Insurance taxes ($845B or 35%), and corporate taxes ($242B or
10%). Based on CBO estimates, under 2013 tax law the top 1% will be paying the
highest average tax rates since 1979, while other income groups will remain at
historic lows.

U.S. taxation is generally progressive, especially the federal income taxes, and
is among the most progressive in the developed world. The highest 10% of income
earners pay a majority of federal taxes, and about half of all taxes. Payroll
taxes for Social Security are a flat regressive tax, with no tax charged on
income above $118,500 (for 2015 and 2016) and no tax at all paid on unearned
income from things such as stocks and capital gains. The historic reasoning for
the regressive nature of the payroll tax is that entitlement programs have not
been viewed as welfare transfers. However, according to the Congressional Budget
Office the net effect of Social Security is that the benefit to tax ratio ranges
from roughly 70% for the top earnings quintile to about 170% for the lowest
earning quintile, making the system progressive.

The top 10% paid 51.8% of total federal taxes in 2009, and the top 1%, with
13.4% of pre-tax national income, paid 22.3% of federal taxes. In 2013 the Tax
Policy Center projected total federal effective tax rates of 35.5% for the top
1%, 27.2% for the top quintile, 13.8% for the middle quintile, and −2.7% for the
bottom quintile. The incidence of corporate income tax has been a matter of
considerable ongoing controversy for decades. State and local taxes vary widely,
but are generally less progressive than federal taxes as they rely heavily on
broadly borne regressive sales and property taxes that yield less volatile
revenue streams, though their consideration does not eliminate the progressive
nature of overall taxation.

During FY 2012, the federal government spent $3.54 trillion on a budget or cash
basis, down $60 billion or 1.7% vs. FY 2011 spending of $3.60 trillion. Major
categories of FY 2012 spending included: Medicare & Medicaid ($802B or 23% of
spending), Social Security ($768B or 22%), Defense Department ($670B or 19%),
non-defense discretionary ($615B or 17%), other mandatory ($461B or 13%) and
interest ($223B or 6%).

The total national debt of the United States in the United States was $18.527
trillion (106% of the GDP) in 2014.[fn 11]

The President holds the title of commander-in-chief of the nation's armed forces
and appoints its leaders, the Secretary of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of
Staff. The United States Department of Defense administers the armed forces,
including the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, and Air Force. The Coast Guard is run by
the Department of Homeland Security in peacetime and by the Department of the
Navy during times of war. In 2008, the armed forces had 1.4 million personnel on
active duty. The Reserves and National Guard brought the total number of troops
to 2.3 million. The Department of Defense also employed about 700,000 civilians,
not including contractors.

Military service is voluntary, though conscription may occur in wartime through
the Selective Service System. American forces can be rapidly deployed by the Air
Force's large fleet of transport aircraft, the Navy's 10 active aircraft
carriers, and Marine expeditionary units at sea with the Navy's Atlantic and
Pacific fleets. The military operates 865 bases and facilities abroad, and
maintains deployments greater than 100 active duty personnel in 25 foreign
countries.

The military budget of the United States in 2011 was more than $700 billion, 41%
of global military spending and equal to the next 14 largest national military
expenditures combined. At 4.7% of GDP, the rate was the second-highest among the
top 15 military spenders, after Saudi Arabia. U.S. defense spending as a
percentage of GDP ranked 23rd globally in 2012 according to the CIA. Defense's
share of U.S. spending has generally declined in recent decades, from Cold War
peaks of 14.2% of GDP in 1953 and 69.5% of federal outlays in 1954 to 4.7% of
GDP and 18.8% of federal outlays in 2011.

The proposed base Department of Defense budget for 2012, $553 billion, was a
4.2% increase over 2011; an additional $118 billion was proposed for the
military campaigns in Iraq and Afghanistan. The last American troops serving in
Iraq departed in December 2011; 4,484 service members were killed during the
Iraq War. Approximately 90,000 U.S. troops were serving in Afghanistan in April
2012; by November 8, 2013 2,285 had been killed during the War in Afghanistan.

Law enforcement in the United States is primarily the responsibility of local
police and sheriff's departments, with state police providing broader services.
The New York City Police Department (NYPD) is the largest in the country.
Federal agencies such as the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the U.S.
Marshals Service have specialized duties, including protecting civil rights,
national security and enforcing U.S. federal courts' rulings and federal laws.
At the federal level and in almost every state, a legal system operates on a
common law. State courts conduct most criminal trials; federal courts handle
certain designated crimes as well as certain appeals from the state criminal
courts. Plea bargaining in the United States is very common; the vast majority
of criminal cases in the country are settled by plea bargain rather than jury
trial.

In 2015, there were 15,696 murders which was 1,532 more than in 2014, a 10.8 per
cent increase, the largest since 1971. The murder rate in 2015 was 4.9 per
100,000 people. In 2012 there were 4.7 murders per 100,000 persons in the United
States, a 54% decline from the modern peak of 10.2 in 1980. In 2001–2, the
United States had above-average levels of violent crime and particularly high
levels of gun violence compared to other developed nations. A cross-sectional
analysis of the World Health Organization Mortality Database from 2003 showed
that United States "homicide rates were 6.9 times higher than rates in the other
high-income countries, driven by firearm homicide rates that were 19.5 times
higher."[needs update] Gun ownership rights continue to be the subject of
contentious political debate.

From 1980 through 2008 males represented 77% of homicide victims and 90% of
offenders. Blacks committed 52.5% of all homicides during that span, at a rate
almost eight times that of whites ("whites" includes most Hispanics), and were
victimized at a rate six times that of whites. Most homicides were intraracial,
with 93% of black victims killed by blacks and 84% of white victims killed by
whites. In 2012, Louisiana had the highest rate of murder and non-negligent
manslaughter in the U.S., and New Hampshire the lowest. The FBI's Uniform Crime
Reports estimates that there were 3,246 violent and property crimes per 100,000
residents in 2012, for a total of over 9 million total crimes.

Capital punishment is sanctioned in the United States for certain federal and
military crimes, and used in 31 states. No executions took place from 1967 to
1977, owing in part to a U.S. Supreme Court ruling striking down arbitrary
imposition of the death penalty. In 1976, that Court ruled that, under
appropriate circumstances, capital punishment may constitutionally be imposed.
Since the decision there have been more than 1,300 executions, a majority of
these taking place in three states: Texas, Virginia, and Oklahoma. Meanwhile,
several states have either abolished or struck down death penalty laws. In 2014,
the country had the fifth-highest number of executions in the world, following
China, Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Iraq.

The United States has the highest documented incarceration rate and total prison
population in the world. At the start of 2008, more than 2.3 million people were
incarcerated, more than one in every 100 adults. At year end 2012, the combined
U.S. adult correctional systems supervised about 6,937,600 offenders. About 1 in
every 35 adult residents in the United States was under some form of
correctional supervision at yearend 2012, the lowest rate observed since 1997.
The prison population has quadrupled since 1980, and state and local spending on
prisons and jails has grown three times as much as that spent on public
education during the same period. However, the imprisonment rate for all
prisoners sentenced to more than a year in state or federal facilities is 478
per 100,000 in 2013 and the rate for pre-trial/remand prisoners is 153 per
100,000 residents in 2012. The country's high rate of incarceration is largely
due to changes in sentencing guidelines and drug policies. According to the
Federal Bureau of Prisons, the majority of inmates held in federal prisons are
convicted of drug offenses. The privatization of prisons and prison services
which began in the 1980s has been a subject of debate. In 2008, Louisiana had
the highest incarceration rate, and Maine the lowest.

The United States has a capitalist mixed economy which is fueled by abundant
natural resources and high productivity. According to the International Monetary
Fund, the U.S. GDP of $16.8 trillion constitutes 24% of the gross world product
at market exchange rates and over 19% of the gross world product at purchasing
power parity (PPP).

The US's nominal GDP is estimated to be $17.528 trillion as of 2014[update] From
1983 to 2008, U.S. real compounded annual GDP growth was 3.3%, compared to a
2.3% weighted average for the rest of the G7. The country ranks ninth in the
world in nominal GDP per capita and sixth in GDP per capita at PPP. The U.S.
dollar is the world's primary reserve currency.

The United States is the largest importer of goods and second-largest exporter,
though exports per capita are relatively low. In 2010, the total U.S. trade
deficit was $635 billion. Canada, China, Mexico, Japan, and Germany are its top
trading partners. In 2010, oil was the largest import commodity, while
transportation equipment was the country's largest export. Japan is the largest
foreign holder of U.S. public debt. The largest holder of the U.S. debt are
American entities, including federal government accounts and the Federal
Reserve, who hold the majority of the debt.[fn 12]

In 2009, the private sector was estimated to constitute 86.4% of the economy,
with federal government activity accounting for 4.3% and state and local
government activity (including federal transfers) the remaining 9.3%. The number
of employees at all levels of government outnumber those in manufacturing by 1.7
to 1. While its economy has reached a postindustrial level of development and
its service sector constitutes 67.8% of GDP, the United States remains an
industrial power. The leading business field by gross business receipts is
wholesale and retail trade; by net income it is manufacturing. In the
franchising business model, McDonald's and Subway are the two most recognized
brands in the world. Coca-Cola is the most recognized soft drink company in the
world.

Chemical products are the leading manufacturing field. The United States is the
largest producer of oil in the world, as well as its second-largest importer. It
is the world's number one producer of electrical and nuclear energy, as well as
liquid natural gas, sulfur, phosphates, and salt. The National Mining
Association provides data pertaining to coal and minerals that include
beryllium, copper, lead, magnesium, zinc, titanium and others.

Agriculture accounts for just under 1% of GDP, yet the United States is the
world's top producer of corn and soybeans. The National Agricultural Statistics
Service maintains agricultural statistics for products that include peanuts,
oats, rye, wheat, rice, cotton, corn, barley, hay, sunflowers, and oilseeds. In
addition, the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) provides livestock
statistics regarding beef, poultry, pork, and dairy products. The country is the
primary developer and grower of genetically modified food, representing half of
the world's biotech crops.

Consumer spending comprises 68% of the U.S. economy in 2015. In August 2010, the
American labor force consisted of 154.1 million people. With 21.2 million
people, government is the leading field of employment. The largest private
employment sector is health care and social assistance, with 16.4 million
people. About 12% of workers are unionized, compared to 30% in Western Europe.
The World Bank ranks the United States first in the ease of hiring and firing
workers. The United States is ranked among the top three in the Global
Competitiveness Report as well. It has a smaller welfare state and redistributes
less income through government action than European nations tend to.

The United States is the only advanced economy that does not guarantee its
workers paid vacation and is one of just a few countries in the world without
paid family leave as a legal right, with the others being Papua New Guinea,
Suriname and Liberia. While federal law currently does not require sick leave,
it is a common benefit for government workers and full-time employees at
corporations. 74% of full-time American workers get paid sick leave, according
to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, although only 24% of part-time workers get
the same benefits. In 2009, the United States had the third-highest workforce
productivity per person in the world, behind Luxembourg and Norway. It was
fourth in productivity per hour, behind those two countries and the Netherlands.

The 2008–2012 global recession significantly affected the United States, with
output still below potential according to the Congressional Budget Office. It
brought high unemployment (which has been decreasing but remains above
pre-recession levels), along with low consumer confidence, the continuing
decline in home values and increase in foreclosures and personal bankruptcies,
an escalating federal debt crisis, inflation, and rising petroleum and food
prices. There remains a record proportion of long-term unemployed, continued
decreasing household income, and tax and federal budget increases.

Americans have the highest average household and employee income among OECD
nations, and in 2007 had the second-highest median household income. According
to the Census Bureau, median household income was $53,657 in 2014. Despite
accounting for only 4.4% of the global population, Americans collectively
possess 41.6% of the world's total wealth, and Americans make up roughly half of
the world's population of millionaires. The Global Food Security Index ranked
the U.S. number one for food affordability and overall food security in March
2013. Americans on average have over twice as much living space per dwelling and
per person as European Union residents, and more than every EU nation. For 2013
the United Nations Development Programme ranked the United States 5th among 187
countries in its Human Development Index and 28th in its inequality-adjusted HDI
(IHDI).

There has been a widening gap between productivity and median incomes since the
1970s. However, the gap between total compensation and productivity is not as
wide because of increased employee benefits such as health insurance. While
inflation-adjusted ("real") household income had been increasing almost every
year from 1947 to 1999, it has since been flat on balance and has even decreased
recently. According to Congressional Research Service, during this same period,
immigration to the United States increased, while the lower 90% of tax filers
incomes became stagnant, and eventually decreasing since 2000. The rise in the
share of total annual income received by the top 1 percent, which has more than
doubled from 9 percent in 1976 to 20 percent in 2011, has significantly affected
income inequality, leaving the United States with one of the widest income
distributions among OECD nations. The post-recession income gains have been very
uneven, with the top 1 percent capturing 95 percent of the income gains from
2009 to 2012. The extent and relevance of income inequality is a matter of
debate.[disputed – discuss]

Wealth, like income and taxes, is highly concentrated; the richest 10% of the
adult population possess 72% of the country's household wealth, while the bottom
half claim only 2%. Between June 2007 and November 2008 the global recession led
to falling asset prices around the world. Assets owned by Americans lost about a
quarter of their value. Since peaking in the second quarter of 2007, household
wealth was down $14 trillion, but has since increased $14 trillion over 2006
levels. At the end of 2014, household debt amounted to $11.8 trillion, down from
$13.8 trillion at the end of 2008.

There were about 578,424 sheltered and unsheltered homeless persons in the U.S.
in January 2014, with almost two-thirds staying in an emergency shelter or
transitional housing program. In 2011 16.7 million children lived in
food-insecure households, about 35% more than 2007 levels, though only 1.1% of
U.S. children, or 845,000, saw reduced food intake or disrupted eating patterns
at some point during the year, and most cases were not chronic. According to a
2014 report by the Census Bureau, one in five young adults lives in poverty
today, up from one in seven in 1980.

Personal transportation is dominated by automobiles, which operate on a network
of 4 million miles (6.4 million km) of public roads, including one of the
world's longest highway systems at 57,000 miles (91700 km). The world's
second-largest automobile market, the United States has the highest rate of
per-capita vehicle ownership in the world, with 765 vehicles per 1,000
Americans. About 40% of personal vehicles are vans, SUVs, or light trucks. The
average American adult (accounting for all drivers and non-drivers) spends 55
minutes driving every day, traveling 29 miles (47 km).

Mass transit accounts for 9% of total U.S. work trips. Transport of goods by
rail is extensive, though relatively low numbers of passengers (approximately 31
million annually) use intercity rail to travel, partly because of the low
population density throughout much of the U.S. interior. However, ridership on
Amtrak, the national intercity passenger rail system, grew by almost 37% between
2000 and 2010. Also, light rail development has increased in recent years.
Bicycle usage for work commutes is minimal.

The civil airline industry is entirely privately owned and has been largely
deregulated since 1978, while most major airports are publicly owned. The three
largest airlines in the world by passengers carried are U.S.-based; American
Airlines is number one after its 2013 acquisition by US Airways. Of the world's
50 busiest passenger airports, 16 are in the United States, including the
busiest, Hartsfield–Jackson Atlanta International Airport, and the
fourth-busiest, O'Hare International Airport in Chicago.

The United States energy market is about 29,000 terawatt hours per year. Energy
consumption per capita is 7.8 tons (7076 kg) of oil equivalent per year, the
10th-highest rate in the world. In 2005, 40% of this energy came from petroleum,
23% from coal, and 22% from natural gas. The remainder was supplied by nuclear
power and renewable energy sources. The United States is the world's largest
consumer of petroleum.

For decades, nuclear power has played a limited role relative to many other
developed countries, in part because of public perception in the wake of a 1979
accident. In 2007, several applications for new nuclear plants were filed. The
United States has 27% of global coal reserves. It is the world's largest
producer of natural gas and crude oil.

Issues that affect water supply in the United States include droughts in the
West, water scarcity, pollution, a backlog of investment, concerns about the
affordability of water for the poorest, and a rapidly retiring workforce.
Increased variability and intensity of rainfall as a result of climate change is
expected to produce both more severe droughts and flooding, with potentially
serious consequences for water supply and for pollution from combined sewer
overflows.[fn 13]

American public education is operated by state and local governments, regulated
by the United States Department of Education through restrictions on federal
grants. In most states, children are required to attend school from the age of
six or seven (generally, kindergarten or first grade) until they turn 18
(generally bringing them through twelfth grade, the end of high school); some
states allow students to leave school at 16 or 17.

About 12% of children are enrolled in parochial or nonsectarian private schools.
Just over 2% of children are homeschooled. The U.S. spends more on education per
student than any nation in the world, spending more than $11,000 per elementary
student in 2010 and more than $12,000 per high school student. Some 80% of U.S.
college students attend public universities.

The United States has many competitive private and public institutions of higher
education. The majority of the world's top universities listed by different
ranking organizations are in the U.S. There are also local community colleges
with generally more open admission policies, shorter academic programs, and
lower tuition. Of Americans 25 and older, 84.6% graduated from high school,
52.6% attended some college, 27.2% earned a bachelor's degree, and 9.6% earned
graduate degrees. The basic literacy rate is approximately 99%. The United
Nations assigns the United States an Education Index of 0.97, tying it for 12th
in the world.

As for public expenditures on higher education, the U.S. trails some other OECD
nations but spends more per student than the OECD average, and more than all
nations in combined public and private spending. As of 2012[update], student
loan debt exceeded one trillion dollars, more than Americans owe on credit
cards.

The United States is home to many cultures and a wide variety of ethnic groups,
traditions, and values. Aside from the Native American, Native Hawaiian, and
Native Alaskan populations, nearly all Americans or their ancestors settled or
immigrated within the past five centuries. Mainstream American culture is a
Western culture largely derived from the traditions of European immigrants with
influences from many other sources, such as traditions brought by slaves from
Africa. More recent immigration from Asia and especially Latin America has added
to a cultural mix that has been described as both a homogenizing melting pot,
and a heterogeneous salad bowl in which immigrants and their descendants retain
distinctive cultural characteristics.

Core American culture was established by Protestant British colonists and shaped
by the frontier settlement process, with the traits derived passed down to
descendants and transmitted to immigrants through assimilation. Americans have
traditionally been characterized by a strong work ethic, competitiveness, and
individualism, as well as a unifying belief in an "American creed" emphasizing
liberty, equality, private property, democracy, rule of law, and a preference
for limited government. Americans are extremely charitable by global standards.
According to a 2006 British study, Americans gave 1.67% of GDP to charity, more
than any other nation studied, more than twice the second place British figure
of 0.73%, and around twelve times the French figure of 0.14%.

The American Dream, or the perception that Americans enjoy high social mobility,
plays a key role in attracting immigrants. Whether this perception is realistic
has been a topic of debate. While mainstream culture holds that the United
States is a classless society, scholars identify significant differences between
the country's social classes, affecting socialization, language, and values.
Americans' self-images, social viewpoints, and cultural expectations are
associated with their occupations to an unusually close degree. While Americans
tend greatly to value socioeconomic achievement, being ordinary or average is
generally seen as a positive attribute.

Mainstream American cuisine is similar to that in other Western countries. Wheat
is the primary cereal grain with about three-quarters of grain products made of
wheat flour and many dishes use indigenous ingredients, such as turkey, venison,
potatoes, sweet potatoes, corn, squash, and maple syrup which were consumed by
Native Americans and early European settlers. These home grown foods are part of
a shared national menu on one of America's most popular holidays; Thanksgiving,
when some Americans make traditional foods to celebrate the occasion.

Characteristic dishes such as apple pie, fried chicken, pizza, hamburgers, and
hot dogs derive from the recipes of various immigrants. French fries, Mexican
dishes such as burritos and tacos, and pasta dishes freely adapted from Italian
sources are widely consumed. Americans drink three times as much coffee as tea.
Marketing by U.S. industries is largely responsible for making orange juice and
milk ubiquitous breakfast beverages.

American eating habits owe a great deal to that of their British culinary roots
with some variations. Although American lands could grow newer vegetables that
Britain could not, most colonists would not eat these new foods until accepted
by Europeans. Over time American foods changed to a point that food critic, John
L. Hess stated in 1972: "Our founding fathers were as far superior to our
present political leaders in the quality of their food as they were in the
quality of their prose and intelligence".

The American fast food industry, the world's largest, pioneered the
drive-through format in the 1940s. Fast food consumption has sparked health
concerns. During the 1980s and 1990s, Americans' caloric intake rose 24%;
frequent dining at fast food outlets is associated with what public health
officials call the American "obesity epidemic". Highly sweetened soft drinks are
widely popular, and sugared beverages account for nine percent of American
caloric intake.

In the 18th and early 19th centuries, American art and literature took most of
its cues from Europe. Writers such as Nathaniel Hawthorne, Edgar Allan Poe, and
Henry David Thoreau established a distinctive American literary voice by the
middle of the 19th century. Mark Twain and poet Walt Whitman were major figures
in the century's second half; Emily Dickinson, virtually unknown during her
lifetime, is now recognized as an essential American poet. A work seen as
capturing fundamental aspects of the national experience and character—such as
Herman Melville's Moby-Dick (1851), Twain's The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn
(1885), F. Scott Fitzgerald's The Great Gatsby (1925) and Harper Lee's To Kill a
Mockingbird (1960)—may be dubbed the "Great American Novel".

Twelve U.S. citizens have won the Nobel Prize in Literature, most recently Bob
Dylan in 2016. William Faulkner, Ernest Hemingway and John Steinbeck are often
named among the most influential writers of the 20th century. Popular literary
genres such as the Western and hardboiled crime fiction developed in the United
States. The Beat Generation writers opened up new literary approaches, as have
postmodernist authors such as John Barth, Thomas Pynchon, and Don DeLillo.

The transcendentalists, led by Thoreau and Ralph Waldo Emerson, established the
first major American philosophical movement. After the Civil War, Charles
Sanders Peirce and then William James and John Dewey were leaders in the
development of pragmatism. In the 20th century, the work of W. V. O. Quine and
Richard Rorty, and later Noam Chomsky, brought analytic philosophy to the fore
of American philosophical academia. John Rawls and Robert Nozick led a revival
of political philosophy. Cornel West and Judith Butler have led a continental
tradition in American philosophical academia. Chicago school economists like
Milton Friedman, James M. Buchanan, and Thomas Sowell have affected various
fields in social and political philosophy.

In the visual arts, the Hudson River School was a mid-19th-century movement in
the tradition of European naturalism. The realist paintings of Thomas Eakins are
now widely celebrated. The 1913 Armory Show in New York City, an exhibition of
European modernist art, shocked the public and transformed the U.S. art scene.
Georgia O'Keeffe, Marsden Hartley, and others experimented with new,
individualistic styles. Major artistic movements such as the abstract
expressionism of Jackson Pollock and Willem de Kooning and the pop art of Andy
Warhol and Roy Lichtenstein developed largely in the United States. The tide of
modernism and then postmodernism has brought fame to American architects such as
Frank Lloyd Wright, Philip Johnson, and Frank Gehry.

One of the first major promoters of American theater was impresario P. T.
Barnum, who began operating a lower Manhattan entertainment complex in 1841. The
team of Harrigan and Hart produced a series of popular musical comedies in New
York starting in the late 1870s. In the 20th century, the modern musical form
emerged on Broadway; the songs of musical theater composers such as Irving
Berlin, Cole Porter, and Stephen Sondheim have become pop standards. Playwright
Eugene O'Neill won the Nobel literature prize in 1936; other acclaimed U.S.
dramatists include multiple Pulitzer Prize winners Tennessee Williams, Edward
Albee, and August Wilson.

Though little known at the time, Charles Ives's work of the 1910s established
him as the first major U.S. composer in the classical tradition, while
experimentalists such as Henry Cowell and John Cage created a distinctive
American approach to classical composition. Aaron Copland and George Gershwin
developed a new synthesis of popular and classical music. Choreographers Isadora
Duncan and Martha Graham helped create modern dance, while George Balanchine and
Jerome Robbins were leaders in 20th-century ballet. Americans have long been
important in the modern artistic medium of photography, with major photographers
including Alfred Stieglitz, Edward Steichen, and Ansel Adams.

The rhythmic and lyrical styles of African-American music have deeply influenced
American music at large, distinguishing it from European traditions. Elements
from folk idioms such as the blues and what is now known as old-time music were
adopted and transformed into popular genres with global audiences. Jazz was
developed by innovators such as Louis Armstrong and Duke Ellington early in the
20th century. Country music developed in the 1920s, and rhythm and blues in the
1940s.

Elvis Presley and Chuck Berry were among the mid-1950s pioneers of rock and
roll. In the 1960s, Bob Dylan emerged from the folk revival to become one of
America's most celebrated songwriters and James Brown led the development of
funk. More recent American creations include hip hop and house music. American
pop stars such as Presley, Michael Jackson, and Madonna have become global
celebrities, as have contemporary musical artists such as Taylor Swift, Britney
Spears, Katy Perry, and Beyoncé as well as hip hop artists Jay Z, Eminem and
Kanye West. Rock bands such as Metallica, the Eagles, and Aerosmith are among
the highest grossing in worldwide sales.

Hollywood, a northern district of Los Angeles, California, is one of the leaders
in motion picture production. The world's first commercial motion picture
exhibition was given in New York City in 1894, using Thomas Edison's
Kinetoscope. The next year saw the first commercial screening of a projected
film, also in New York, and the United States was in the forefront of sound
film's development in the following decades. Since the early 20th century, the
U.S. film industry has largely been based in and around Hollywood, although in
the 21st century an increasing number of films are not made there, and film
companies have been subject to the forces of globalization.

Director D. W. Griffith, American's top filmmaker during the silent film period,
was central to the development of film grammar, and producer/entrepreneur Walt
Disney was a leader in both animated film and movie merchandising. Directors
such as John Ford redefined the image of the American Old West and history, and,
like others such as John Huston, broadened the possibilities of cinema with
location shooting, with great influence on subsequent directors. The industry
enjoyed its golden years, in what is commonly referred to as the "Golden Age of
Hollywood", from the early sound period until the early 1960s, with screen
actors such as John Wayne and Marilyn Monroe becoming iconic figures. In the
1970s, film directors such as Martin Scorsese, Francis Ford Coppola and Robert
Altman were a vital component in what became known as "New Hollywood" or the
"Hollywood Renaissance", grittier films influenced by French and Italian realist
pictures of the post-war period. Since, directors such as Steven Spielberg,
George Lucas and James Cameron have gained renown for their blockbuster films,
often characterized by high production costs, and in return, high earnings at
the box office, with Cameron's Avatar (2009) earning more than $2 billion.

Notable films topping the American Film Institute's AFI 100 list include Orson
Welles's Citizen Kane (1941), which is frequently cited as the greatest film of
all time, Casablanca (1942), The Godfather (1972), Gone with the Wind (1939),
Lawrence of Arabia (1962), The Wizard of Oz (1939), The Graduate (1967), On the
Waterfront (1954), Schindler's List (1993), Singin' in the Rain (1952), It's a
Wonderful Life (1946) and Sunset Boulevard (1950). The Academy Awards, popularly
known as the Oscars, have been held annually by the Academy of Motion Picture
Arts and Sciences since 1929, and the Golden Globe Awards have been held
annually since January 1944.

American football is by several measures the most popular spectator sport; the
National Football League (NFL) has the highest average attendance of any sports
league in the world, and the Super Bowl is watched by millions globally.
Baseball has been regarded as the U.S. national sport since the late 19th
century, with Major League Baseball (MLB) being the top league. Basketball and
ice hockey are the country's next two leading professional team sports, with the
top leagues being the National Basketball Association (NBA) and the National
Hockey League (NHL). These four major sports, when played professionally, each
occupy a season at different, but overlapping, times of the year. College
football and basketball attract large audiences. In soccer, the country hosted
the 1994 FIFA World Cup, the men's national soccer team qualified for ten World
Cups and the women's team has won the FIFA Women's World Cup three times; Major
League Soccer is the sport's highest league in the United States (featuring 19
American and 3 Canadian teams). The market for professional sports in the United
States is roughly $69 billion, roughly 50% larger than that of all of Europe,
the Middle East, and Africa combined.

Eight Olympic Games have taken place in the United States. As of 2014, the
United States has won 2,400 medals at the Summer Olympic Games, more than any
other country, and 281 in the Winter Olympic Games, the second most behind
Norway. While most major U.S. sports have evolved out of European practices,
basketball, volleyball, skateboarding, and snowboarding are American inventions,
some of which have become popular in other countries. Lacrosse and surfing arose
from Native American and Native Hawaiian activities that predate Western
contact. The most watched individual sports are golf and auto racing,
particularly NASCAR. The United States men's national volleyball team has won
three gold medals at the Olympic Games, one FIVB World Championship, two FIVB
Volleyball World Cup, and one FIVB World League.

Rugby union is considered the fastest growing sport in the U.S., with the amount
of registered players numbered at 115,000+ and a further 1.2 million
participants. The United States national rugby union team (the Eagles) have
competed in every Rugby World Cup since 1987 (except for the 1995 Rugby World
Cup), PRO Rugby is the elite level competition and was introduced in 2016. USA
Rugby is the governing body and oversees rugby union in the USA. The USA Rugby
7s team won gold at the 1920 and 1924 Olympics, with Las Vegas hosting the USA
Sevens yearly.

The four major broadcasters in the U.S. are the National Broadcasting Company
(NBC), Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS), the American Broadcasting Company
(ABC) and Fox. The four major broadcast television networks are all commercial
entities. Cable television offers hundreds of channels catering to a variety of
niches. Americans listen to radio programming, also largely commercial, on
average just over two-and-a-half hours a day.

In 1998, the number of U.S. commercial radio stations had grown to 4,793 AM
stations and 5,662 FM stations. In addition, there are 1,460 public radio
stations. Most of these stations are run by universities and public authorities
for educational purposes and are financed by public or private funds,
subscriptions and corporate underwriting. Much public-radio broadcasting is
supplied by NPR (formerly National Public Radio). NPR was incorporated in
February 1970 under the Public Broadcasting Act of 1967; its television
counterpart, PBS, was also created by the same legislation. (NPR and PBS are
operated separately from each other.) As of September 30, 2014[update], there
are 15,433 licensed full-power radio stations in the US according to the U.S.
Federal Communications Commission (FCC).

Well-known newspapers are The New York Times, USA Today and The Wall Street
Journal. Although the cost of publishing has increased over the years, the price
of newspapers has generally remained low, forcing newspapers to rely more on
advertising revenue and on articles provided by a major wire service, such as
the Associated Press or Reuters, for their national and world coverage. With
very few exceptions, all the newspapers in the U.S. are privately owned, either
by large chains such as Gannett or McClatchy, which own dozens or even hundreds
of newspapers; by small chains that own a handful of papers; or in a situation
that is increasingly rare, by individuals or families. Major cities often have
"alternative weeklies" to complement the mainstream daily papers, for example,
New York City's The Village Voice or Los Angeles' LA Weekly, to name two of the
best-known. Major cities may also support a local business journal, trade papers
relating to local industries, and papers for local ethnic and social groups.
Early versions of the American newspaper comic strip and the American comic book
began appearing in the 19th century. In 1938, Superman, the comic book superhero
of DC Comics, developed into an American icon. Aside from web portals and search
engines, the most popular websites are Facebook, YouTube, Wikipedia, Yahoo.com,
eBay, Amazon and Twitter.

More than 800 publications are produced in Spanish, the second most widely
spoken mother tongue behind English.

The United States has been a leader in technological innovation since the late
19th century and scientific research since the mid 20th century. Methods for
producing interchangeable parts were developed by the U.S. War Department by the
Federal Armories during the first half of the 19th century. This technology,
along with the establishment of a machine tool industry, enabled the U.S. to
have large scale manufacturing of sewing machines, bicycles and other items in
the late 19th century and became known as the American system of manufacturing.
Factory electrification in the early 20th century and introduction of the
assembly line and other labor saving techniques created the system called mass
production.

In 1876, Alexander Graham Bell was awarded the first U.S. patent for the
telephone. Thomas Edison's research laboratory, one of the first of its kind,
developed the phonograph, the first long-lasting light bulb, and the first
viable movie camera. The latter lead to emergence of the worldwide entertainment
industry. In the early 20th century, the automobile companies of Ransom E. Olds
and Henry Ford popularized the assembly line. The Wright brothers, in 1903, made
the first sustained and controlled heavier-than-air powered flight.

The rise of Nazism in the 1930s led many European scientists, including Albert
Einstein, Enrico Fermi, and John von Neumann, to immigrate to the United States.
During World War II, the Manhattan Project developed nuclear weapons, ushering
in the Atomic Age, while the Space Race produced rapid advances in rocketry,
materials science, and aeronautics.

The invention of the transistor in the 1950s, a key active component in
practically all modern electronics, led to many technological developments and a
significant expansion of the U.S. technology industry. This in turn led to the
establishment of many new technology companies and regions around the country
such as in Silicon Valley in California. Advancements by American microprocessor
companies such as Advanced Micro Devices (AMD), and Intel along with both
computer software and hardware companies that include Adobe Systems, Apple
Computer, IBM, Microsoft, and Sun Microsystems created and popularized the
personal computer. The ARPANET was developed in the 1960s to meet Defense
Department requirements, and became the first of a series of networks which
evolved into the Internet.

These advancements then lead to greater personalization of technology for
individual use. As of 2013[update], 83.8% of American households owned at least
one computer, and 73.3% had high-speed Internet service. 91% of Americans also
own a mobile phone as of May 2013[update]. The United States ranks highly with
regard to freedom of use of the internet.

In the 21st century, approximately two-thirds of research and development
funding comes from the private sector. The United States leads the world in
scientific research papers and impact factor.

The United States has a life expectancy of 79.8 years at birth, up from 75.2
years in 1990. Increasing obesity in the United States and health improvements
elsewhere have contributed to lowering the country's rank in life expectancy
from 1987, when it was 11th in the world. Obesity rates in the United States are
amongst the highest in the world.

Approximately one-third of the adult population is obese and an additional third
is overweight; the obesity rate, the highest in the industrialized world, has
more than doubled in the last quarter-century. Obesity-related type 2 diabetes
is considered epidemic by health care professionals. The infant mortality rate
of 6.17 per thousand places the United States 56th-lowest out of 224 countries.

In 2010, coronary artery disease, lung cancer, stroke, chronic obstructive
pulmonary diseases, and traffic accidents caused the most years of life lost in
the U.S. Low back pain, depression, musculoskeletal disorders, neck pain, and
anxiety caused the most years lost to disability. The most deleterious risk
factors were poor diet, tobacco smoking, obesity, high blood pressure, high
blood sugar, physical inactivity, and alcohol use. Alzheimer's disease, drug
abuse, kidney disease and cancer, and falls caused the most additional years of
life lost over their age-adjusted 1990 per-capita rates. U.S. teenage pregnancy
and abortion rates are substantially higher than in other Western nations,
especially among blacks and Hispanics.

The U.S. is a global leader in medical innovation. America solely developed or
contributed significantly to 9 of the top 10 most important medical innovations
since 1975 as ranked by a 2001 poll of physicians, while the EU and Switzerland
together contributed to five. Since 1966, more Americans have received the Nobel
Prize in Medicine than the rest of the world combined. From 1989 to 2002, four
times more money was invested in private biotechnology companies in America than
in Europe. The U.S. health-care system far outspends any other nation, measured
in both per capita spending and percentage of GDP.

Health-care coverage in the United States is a combination of public and private
efforts and is not universal. In 2014, 13.4% of the population did not carry
health insurance. The subject of uninsured and underinsured Americans is a major
political issue. In 2006, Massachusetts became the first state to mandate
universal health insurance. Federal legislation passed in early 2010 would
ostensibly create a near-universal health insurance system around the country by
2014, though the bill and its ultimate effect are issues of controversy.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Australian_federal_election,_2016

The 2016 Australian federal election was a double dissolution election held on
Saturday 2 July to elect all 226 members of the 45th Parliament of Australia,
after an extended eight-week official campaign period. It was the first double
dissolution election since the 1987 election and the first under a new voting
system for the Senate that replaced group voting tickets with optional
preferential voting.

Though federal election outcomes are traditionally called by political
commentators on election night, even during the following day the outcome could
not be predicted, with many close seats in doubt. After a week of vote counting,
still no party had won enough seats in the 150-seat House of Representatives to
form a majority government. Neither the incumbent Turnbull Government led by
Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull of the Liberal/National Coalition nor the
Shorten Opposition led by Opposition Leader Bill Shorten of the Australian Labor
Party were in a position to concede defeat or claim victory. Many political
commentators predicted a hung parliament such as occurred at the 2010 election.

Turnbull repeatedly claimed prior to the election that a vote for a Labor, Green
or Independent candidate was a vote for "the Labor/Green/Independent alliance",
and also refused to countenance a hung parliament. However, during the uncertain
week following the election, Turnbull negotiated with the crossbench and secured
confidence and supply support from Bob Katter and from independents Andrew
Wilkie and Cathy McGowan in the event of a hung parliament and resulting
minority government. During crossbench negotiations, Turnbull pledged additional
staff and resources for crossbenchers, and stated "It is my commitment to work
in every way possible to ensure that the crossbenchers have access to all of the
information they need and all of the resources they need to be able to play the
role they need in this parliament". On 10 July, eight days after the election
took place and following Turnbull's negotiations with the crossbench where he
secured sufficient confidence and supply support, Shorten conceded defeat,
acknowledging that the incumbent Coalition had enough seats to form either a
minority or majority government. Turnbull claimed victory later that day. In the
closest federal majority result since the 1961 election, the ABC declared on 11
July that the incumbent Coalition would be able to form a one-seat majority
government. It was the first election result since federation where the
post-election opposition won more seats than the post-election government in
both of Australia's two most populous states, New South Wales and Victoria.

In the 150-seat House of Representatives, the one-term incumbent
Liberal/National Coalition government was re-elected with a reduced 76 seats, a
one-seat majority. The Coalition's victory marked the first time since 2004 that
a government had been reelected with an absolute majority in the House of
Representatives. Resulting from the national two-party swing against the
government, the Labor opposition picked up a significant number of previously
government-held seats − totaling 69 seats. On the crossbench the Greens, the
Nick Xenophon Team, Katter's Australian Party, and independents Wilkie and
McGowan won a seat each. On 19 July the Australian Electoral Commission (AEC)
announced a re-count for the Coalition-held but provisionally Labor-won Division
of Herbert. At the start of the Herbert re-count, Labor led by eight votes. The
AEC announced on 31 July that Labor had won Herbert by 37 votes.

The final outcome in the 76-seat Australian Senate took over four weeks to
complete despite significant voting changes. Earlier in 2016, legislation
changed the Senate voting system from a full-preference single transferable vote
with group voting tickets to an optional-preferential single transferable vote.
The final Senate result was announced on 4 August: Liberal/National Coalition 30
seats (−3), Labor 26 seats (+1), Greens 9 seats (−1), One Nation 4 seats (+4)
and Nick Xenophon Team 3 seats (+2). Former broadcaster and founder of the
Justice Party Derryn Hinch, won a seat, while Jacqui Lambie, Liberal Democrat
David Leyonhjelm and Family First's Bob Day retained their seats. The number of
crossbenchers increased by two to a record 20. The Liberal/National Coalition
will require at least nine additional votes to reach a Senate majority, an
increase of three. The Coalition and Australian Labor Party agreed that the
longer six-year Senate terms would be allocated to the first six senators
elected in each state, while the last six elected would serve a three-year term.
This approach differs to the "recount" method, whereby the Senators who would
have been elected in a normal half-Senate election are allocated a six-year term
instead.

By choosing the "order elected" method rather than the recount method, Labor and
the Coalition each gained an additional six-year Senator at the expense of
crossbenchers Derryn Hinch and The Greens. The ALP and Coalition stated that the
"order-elected" method was 'consistent with convention', but were criticised by
the affected crossbenchers for not using the recount method, which they had both
supported in two separate Senate resolutions in 1998 and 2010.

1 As a result of the 2015 boundary redistribution, the New South Wales
Liberal-held seats of Barton, Dobell and Paterson became notionally marginal
Labor seats.

2 A re-count commenced on 19 July in the Queensland division of Herbert. Prior
to the re-count, Labor was provisionally ahead of its LNP candidate by eight
votes. On 31 July the Australian Electoral Commission announced Labor had won
Herbert by 37 votes. The LNP was considering a legal challenge to the result.

The final Senate result was announced on 4 August. The incumbent
Liberal/National Coalition government won 30 seats, a net loss of three − the
Coalition lost four Senators, one each from New South Wales, Queensland, Western
Australia and South Australia, but gained a Senator in Victoria. The Labor
opposition won 26 seats, a gain of one − a Senator in Western Australia. The
number of crossbenchers increased by two to a record 20. The Liberal/National
Coalition will require at least nine additional votes to reach a Senate
majority, an increase of three.

At the close of nominations on 9 June 2016, there were 1,625 candidates in total
– 994 for the House of Representatives and 631 for the Senate. The number of
Senate candidates was the highest ever at an Australian election, increased from
529 in 2013.

Based on the 2013 post-election pendulum for the Australian federal election,
this Mackerras pendulum was updated to include new notional margin estimates due
to redistributions in New South Wales, Western Australia and the Australian
Capital Territory. The net effect of the redistributions reduced the
Liberal/National Coalition from 90 to a notional 88 seats and increased Labor
from 55 to a notional 57 seats.

While every federal election after 1961 has been won by those that also won the
majority of federal seats in New South Wales, unusually nearly half of all
marginal government seats are in New South Wales at this election, of which
nearly half are in Western Sydney and the other half in rural and regional
areas, and with no more than a few seats each in every other state.

Assuming a theoretical uniform swing, for the Labor opposition to get to 76
seats and majority government would require Labor with 50.5 percent of the
two-party vote from a 4.0-point two-party swing or greater, while for the
incumbent Coalition to lose majority government would require the Coalition with
50.2 percent of the two-party vote from a 3.3-point two-party swing or greater.

a Though the seats of O'Connor and Durack are marginal Liberal seats, margins
are based on the two-candidate preferred result against the National Party of
Western Australia rather than the two-party preferred result against Labor, on
which all other marginal seats are based. O'Connor and Durack are not included
for Labor majority calculation but are included for Coalition loss of majority
calculation.

b Though the seats of Dobell, Paterson and Barton were Liberal wins at the
previous election, redistributions changed them to notionally marginal Labor
seats.

c Pat Conroy is the current MP for the Division of Charlton which is being
renamed the Division of Hunter at the next election.

Elections in Australia use a full-preferential system in one vote, one value
single-member seats for the 150-member House of Representatives (lower house)
and in time for this election changed from full-preferential group voting
tickets to an optional-preferential single transferable vote system of
proportional representation in the 76-member Senate (upper house). Voting is
compulsory, by Westminster convention, but subject to constitutional
constraints. The decision as to the type of election and its date is for the
Prime Minister, who advises the Governor-General to set the process in motion by
dissolving the lower or both houses and issuing writs for election.

Section 13 of the constitution requires that in half-Senate elections the
election of state senators must take place within one year before the places
become vacant. Since the normal terms of half the senators would have ended on
30 June 2017, the writs for a half-Senate election could not be issued earlier
than 1 July 2016, and the earliest possible date for a simultaneous
House/half-Senate election would have been 6 August 2016. There is no
constitutional requirement for simultaneous elections for the Senate and the
House of Representatives, and there are precedents for separate elections;
however, governments and the electorate have long preferred that elections for
the two Houses take place simultaneously.

A House-only election can be called at any time during a parliamentary term.
Whether held simultaneously with a Senate election or separately, an election
for the House of Representatives was required to have been held on or before 14
January 2017, which is calculated under provisions of the constitution and the
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 (CEA). Section 28 of the Constitution of
Australia provides that the term of a House expires three years from the first
sitting of the House, unless it is dissolved earlier. The previous federal
election was held on 7 September 2013. The 44th Parliament of Australia opened
on 12 November 2013 and its term would have expired on 11 November 2016. Writs
for an election can be issued up to ten days after a dissolution or expiry of
the House. Up to 27 days can be allowed for nominations, and the actual election
can be set for a maximum of 31 days after close of nominations, resulting in the
latest possible House of Representatives election date of Saturday, 14 January
2017.

A double dissolution cannot take place within six months before the date of the
expiry of the House of Representatives.[a] That meant that a double dissolution
could not be granted after 11 May 2016. Allowing for the same stages indicated
above, the last possible date for a double dissolution election was 16 July
2016.

On 2 November 2015, Prime Minister Turnbull stated: "I would say around
September–October [2016] is when you should expect the next election to be."
However, in December 2015, ABC News reported that some "senior Liberal MPs" had
been seeking an election as early as March 2016. An election held at this time
would have required a separate half-Senate election to be held in late 2016 or
early 2017.

On 21 March 2016, Turnbull announced that the parliament would be recalled for
both houses to sit on 18 April to consider for a third time the bills to
reinstate the Australian Building and Construction Commission (ABCC). Turnbull
also said that if the Senate failed to pass the bill, then there would be a
double dissolution of parliament and an election would be held on 2 July. The
delivery of the federal budget was also brought forward from 10 May to 3 May. On
18 April, the Senate once again rejected the bills to reinstate the ABCC. On 8
May Malcolm Turnbull attended Government House to advise the Governor-General to
issue the writs for a double dissolution on 9 May. This confirmed the date of
the election; 2 July 2016.

By 18 April 2016 there were four bills that met the requirements of Section 57
of the constitution for a double dissolution.

On 19 April the Prime Minister confirmed that, following the 2016 federal budget
set for 3 May, he would advise the Governor-General to call a double dissolution
election on Saturday 2 July. Any or all of these four bills could have been
cited in his advice. On Sunday 8 May 2016, Turnbull visited Government House and
formally advised Governor-General Sir Peter Cosgrove to dissolve both Houses of
Parliament and issue the writs for a double dissolution election to be held on 2
July 2016. The advice was based on Parliament's inability to pass the following
three bills:

The constitutional and legal provisions which impacted on the choice of election
dates include:

On 8 May 2016, the office of the Governor-General released documents relating to
the calling of the election. The documents set out a timeline of key dates for
the election.

The Coalition won the 2013 federal election with 90 of the 150 seats in the
House of Representatives, on a swing of 17 seats or 3.6 points on a two-party
basis, defeating the six-year Labor government. Labor held 55 seats, and
crossbenchers held the remaining five. The Abbott government was sworn in to
office on 18 September 2013.

Kevin Rudd resigned as Labor's leader following the defeat of the party. Chris
Bowen became the interim leader in the approach to a leadership election. Two
candidates, Anthony Albanese and Bill Shorten, declared their candidacy; Shorten
was declared the winner on 13 October 2013.

As a result of lost ballot papers, on 18 February 2014 the High Court of
Australia, sitting as the Court of Disputed Returns, ordered a new half-Senate
election for Western Australia, which was held on 5 April 2014.

Senator John Madigan resigned from the Democratic Labour Party and became an
independent Senator in September 2014, citing long-term internal party tensions.

On 24 November 2014, Tasmanian Senator Jacqui Lambie resigned from the Palmer
United Party and on 13 March 2015, Queensland Senator Glenn Lazarus also
announced his resignation from the Palmer United Party; both then sat as
independents.

On 14 September 2015, the incumbent Prime Minister, Tony Abbott, was challenged
for the leadership of the Liberal Party and thus the prime ministership by
Malcolm Turnbull, the Minister for Communications. Turnbull won the vote 54–44
and on 15 September was sworn in as prime minister, starting the Turnbull
government. On 11 February 2016 Warren Truss, the Deputy Prime Minister,
announced his decision to retire from politics at the 2016 federal election and
immediately stood aside as Leader of the Nationals. Barnaby Joyce was elected as
Leader and was sworn as the Deputy Prime Minister, and Fiona Nash was elected as
Deputy Leader of the Nationals. Truss also resigned from the Turnbull Ministry.

Ian Macfarlane attempted to defect from the Liberal to the National party room
with accompanying demands for additional Nationals cabinet representation, and
the Mal Brough–James Ashby diary controversy deepened in the last week of the
campaign. Along with the unexpected by-election swing and Turnbull's
significantly lessened personal ratings in the concurrent December Newspoll,
some News Limited journalists claimed that Turnbull's honeymoon was over.

The Nick Xenophon Team (NXT) listed many candidates throughout Australia, with
ABC psephologist Antony Green indicating NXT had a "strong chance of winning
lower house seats and three or four Senate seats".

Liberal Senator Michael Ronaldson announced on 18 December 2015 that he would
leave parliament before the next election, after moving from the outer ministry
in the Abbott government to the backbench in the Turnbull government. He
resigned on 28 February 2016, and the casual vacancy was filled by James
Paterson on 9 March 2016.

Labor Senator Joe Bullock announced on 1 March 2016 that he would be resigning
from the Senate after the autumn sittings of parliament, citing—among other
reasons—his opposition to same-sex marriage being at odds with the Labor Party's
platform to bind its members in a supporting vote after 2019. Bullock tendered
his resignation to Senate President Stephen Parry on 13 April 2016. The casual
vacancy was filled by Pat Dodson on 28 April 2016.

Palmer United Party leader Clive Palmer announced on 4 May 2016 that he would
not recontest his seat of Fairfax at the election. On 23 May he also ruled out
running for a Senate seat.

In the lower house seat of Brisbane, both Liberal-National and Labor candidates
were openly gay; a first in Australian federal political history.

In the 44th Parliament, there were three by-elections. Rudd resigned from
Parliament on 22 November 2013, triggering the 2014 Griffith by-election, which
was held on 8 February, with Terri Butler retaining the seat for Labor.

On 21 July 2015, Liberal Don Randall died, triggering the 2015 Canning
by-election, which was held on 19 September. Andrew Hastie retained the seat for
the Liberal Party, having to rely on preferences after suffering a substantial
swing to the Labor candidate.

Joe Hockey was not retained as Treasurer in the Turnbull Ministry, and announced
his resignation from Parliament shortly afterwards, triggering the 2015 North
Sydney by-election which was held on 5 December. The seat was retained for the
Liberal Party by Trent Zimmerman. Zimmerman won with 48.2% of the primary vote
after a larger-than-predicted 12.8-point swing against the Turnbull Coalition
government. This was only the second time in North Sydney since federation that
the successful Liberal candidate failed to obtain a majority of the primary vote
and had to rely on preferences. Zimmerman faced a double-digit primary vote
swing − more than triple that of the 2015 Canning by-election − despite the
absence of a Labor candidate. Labor has never been successful in the safe
Liberal seat. The Liberal two-candidate vote of 60.2% against independent
Stephen Ruff compares with the previous election vote of 65.9% against Labor.
The reduction of 5.7 points cannot be considered a "two-party/candidate
preferred swing" − when a major party is absent, preference flows to both major
parties do not take place, resulting in asymmetric preference flows.

In November 2014 the Australian Electoral Commission announced that a
redistribution of electoral boundaries in New South Wales and Western Australia
would be undertaken before the next election. A determination of the states'
membership entitlements under the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 meant that
Western Australia's entitlement increased from 15 to 16 seats, and New South
Wales' decreased from 48 to 47 seats. A redistribution also occurred in the
Australian Capital Territory, as seven years had elapsed since the last time the
ACT's boundaries were reviewed. On 16 November 2015, the AEC announced that a
redistribution of electoral boundaries in Tasmania would be deferred until after
the election, as the Electoral Act provides that a redistribution shall not
commence where there is less than a year until the expiry of the House of
Representatives (i.e., 11 November 2016).

In October 2015 the AEC announced plans to abolish the seat of Hunter. Electors
in the north of Hunter would have joined New England, while the roughly 40%
remainder would have become part of Paterson, where the Liberal margin would
have been reduced from a fairly safe 9.8 points to an extremely marginal 0.5
point as a result. Hunter was first contested at the inaugural 1901 federal
election; the AEC's naming guidelines require it to make "every effort" to
preserve the names of the original federal divisions. The Commission proposed
renaming Charlton to Hunter, and in honour of deceased Prime Minister Gough
Whitlam, renaming Throsby to Whitlam.

The final proposal, however, saw Charlton abolished, with Hunter moving slightly
eastward to take in much of Charlton's territory. Additionally, Paterson was
made more compact and pushed well to the south, taking in some heavily Labor
territory that had previously been in Hunter and Newcastle. This had the effect
of erasing the Liberals' majority in Paterson; Labor now had a notional majority
of 0.5 percent.

The new seat created in Western Australia was the Division of Burt, named after
the Burt family, and centred on the south-east areas of metropolitan Perth.

The Division of Fraser in the ACT was renamed Division of Fenner, to honour the
late scientist Professor Frank Fenner. The AEC announced that the name Fraser
will be used for a future division in Victoria, named in honour of Malcolm
Fraser, a former Prime Minister.

Following the previous election, the Abbott Government announced it would
investigate changing the electoral system for the Senate. On 22 February 2016,
the Turnbull Government announced several proposed changes. In the Senate, the
changes had the support of the Liberal/National Coalition, the Australian
Greens, and Nick Xenophon. The legislation passed both houses of the Parliament
of Australia on 18 March 2016 after the Senate sat all night debating the bill.

The changes abolished group voting tickets (GVTs) and introduced optional
preferential voting, along with party logos on the ballot paper. The ballot
paper continues to have a box for each party above a heavy line, with each
party's candidates in a column below that party's box below the solid line.
Previously, a voter could either mark a single box above the line, which
triggered the party's group voting ticket (a pre-assigned sequence of
preferences), or place a number in every box below the line to assign their own
preferences. As a result of the changes, voters may assign their preferences for
parties above the line (numbering as many boxes as they wish), or individual
candidates below the line, and are not required to fill all of the boxes. Both
above and below the line voting are now optional preferential voting. For above
the line, voters will be instructed to write at least their first six
preferences; however, a "savings provision" will still count the ballot if less
than six were given. As a result, fewer votes are expected to be classed as
informal; however, more ballots will "exhaust" as a result (i.e. some votes are
not counted towards electing any candidate). For below the line, voters will be
required to number at least their first 12 preferences. Voters will be free to
continue numbering as many preferences as they like beyond the minimum number
specified. Another savings provision will allow ballot papers with at least 6
below the line preferences to be formal, catering for people who confuse the
above and below the line instructions.

Antony Green, a psephologist for the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, wrote
several publications on various aspects of the proposed Senate changes. As with
every double dissolution election the entire Senate is re-elected (12 seats per
state rather than the usual half Senate election of six seats per state).
Consequently, the number of votes required to earn a seat (the "quota") is
halved. Due to the abolition of GVTs, it is no longer possible to create
"calculators" that assess, with reasonable accuracy, the eventual senate
election outcome. Therefore, according to Antony Green, "my working guide is
that if a party has more than 0.5 of a quota, it will be in the race for one of
the final seats." His calculation of the percentage of primary-vote required for
the first six full- and half-quotas at this election is as follows:

In its pre-election editorial endorsements, the press overwhelmingly backed the
Coalition over Labor – only the Sunday edition of the Melbourne Age plumped for
the Opposition.

Among the Sunday papers, Turnbull was preferred by Sydney's Sun-Herald and
Sunday Telegraph, Melbourne's Sunday Herald Sun, the Sunday Mail in Brisbane,
the Sunday Times in Perth and the Sunday Mail in Adelaide. Labor won the
endorsement of only the Sunday Age in Melbourne. The Sunday Tasmanian and Sunday
Territorian did not publish endorsements prior to this election.

Labor's close ties to the union movement were of concern to many papers, even to
the supportive Sunday Age, which described the issue as "vexed" and unresolved.
Others went further, fearful that Shorten would not "free Labor from the union
shackles that too often oppose sensible reforms," in the words of the
Sun-Herald. "Mr Shorten still remains more union boss than potential prime
minister," concluded the Sunday Telegraph. Shorten, the Sunday Herald Sun
concurred, "is not a man to stand up to militant unions."

On the economy, there was general concern about the sustainability of Labor's
approach to public spending. "Even an economic illiterate could see [Shorten's]
10-year economic "plan" was forged in fantasy land," opined the Sunday Times,
"On this dangerous policy alone, Labor should not be given the opportunity to
govern." The Sunday Age, however, took the view that increased taxation, and
with it increased spending on education, should take priority: "a smarter
society will be more productive." Though the Sun-Herald was supportive of some
Labor policies, it said Shorten had failed to make "a compelling case that
Australia needs a new government." Invoking the instability of Australian
politics since 2010, the paper was unenthusiastic about electing "our sixth
prime minister in six years." Turnbull, the Sun-Herald concluded, deserved "a
chance to establish his own mandate."

The need for political stability was emphasised by the Perth Sunday Times and
Adelaide Sunday Mail: at that time both states faced an uncertain future due to
recent downturns in mining, steelmaking and shipbuilding. The expectation that
any Labor government would govern in minority gave the Mail pause. Australia, it
wrote, "needs stability ... this country has suffered enough through
balance-of-power ... politicians". Both backed the Coalition as the best
alternative to, in the Times' words, "steer us through these turbulent times."

The Brisbane Sunday Mail summed up the general view among the papers of
Turnbull: "yet to fulfil his promise as Prime Minister." Though the Sunday
Telegraph agreed his government had been "timid", it concluded "We are fortunate
to have as Prime Minister a man of integrity, decency and undoubted intellect."

The Australian Financial Review endorsed the Coalition two days before polling
day, in particular its plans to balance the federal budget, and boost economic
growth by cutting company tax. Although the editorial viewed Turnbull's
performance in office as "too timid", it concluded that "there is no
alternative" but to support his re-election. The newspaper acknowledged
Shorten's effectiveness as a campaigner, but it was scathing of the Opposition
Leader's platform and tactics. His "resort to crass populism and the outdated
politics of class comes from a once-reforming centre-left party which has
refused to free itself from ... trade union and factional control," the
editorial ran. "Mr Shorten's populist pitch echoes some of the global political
phenomenon represented by Brexit and Donald Trump by exciting a squabble over
shares of a declining income pie."

The Australian endorsed the Coalition the following day, highlighting the
Government's budget discipline. Turnbull's "stolid pitch on frugality ...
provided the contrast against which the Labor opposition could be judged," the
editorial ran. Though it rated the Coalition's economic plan as "adequate at
best," The Australian contrasted this with "an unthinkable Labor alternative
that, even after the overblown GFC stimulus of the Rudd–Gillard–Rudd years,
would respond to current challenges by spending more, taxing more and taking the
nation deeper into debt."

The metropolitan dailies backed the Coalition without exception. Turnbull's
personal qualities and platform appealed more to the editors than his short
record in office. The Age spoke for many in concluding that "Mr Turnbull
deserves the chance to deliver". The Daily Telegraph praised the Prime
Minister's "consistency ... He has stuck fast on addressing Australia's debt and
deficit problems." Newspapers particularly highlighted, in the words of the West
Australian, the Coalition's "better understanding of what is needed to run the
economy and rein in debt." The Sydney Morning Herald welcomed the Coalition's
curbs on superannuation tax breaks and offered qualified support for company tax
cuts ("Businesses, small and large, create jobs.") The Age endorsed the super
changes and company tax cut, but was critical of the Coalition's "shamefully
harsh" border protection policies and planned same-sex marriage plebiscite. The
Canberra Times gave the Coalition "credit for recognising the necessity for cuts
in public-sector spending" and reforming super. The Courier-Mail backed
Turnbull's 'jobs and growth' agenda as "a more coherent prescription in an era
that demands experience, stability and certainty."

The Courier-Mail, Canberra Times, Age and Adelaide Advertiser acknowledged
Shorten's strengths on the campaign trail. The Advertiser spoke of a
"revitalised performance from Bill Shorten ... The Opposition is now in with a
fighting chance." The Age welcomed its plans on negative gearing and capital
gains tax; the Herald backed the case for Labor's higher increases in education
funding.

However, for almost every paper, this was outweighed by the party's service of
union interests and its unsustainable profligacy. "There is no sign at all that
Mr Shorten will force Labor to remove the disproportionate influence of unions
and their money on his party," the Herald wrote, regretting that despite the
reforming instincts of Shadow Treasurer Chris Bowen, as a whole "Labor baulks at
progress that affects the public service and unions." For the NT News, "the
party's policy positions are incoherent. The sheer breadth of spending promises
show Labor is not ready for government." The Herald Sun agreed that in Labor's
"DNA is an inclination to spend ... That Australia must learn to live within its
means is a lesson Labor still fails to grasp." The Herald chided Shorten for the
dishonesty of his Medicare scare campaign ("his judgement was found wanting") as
did the Courier-Mail ("hysteria"). The Daily Telegraph also highlighted Labor's
record on border protection – 50,000 illegal maritime arrivals and perhaps 1,000
deaths at sea – and noted the widespread desire of many Labor candidates and the
Greens to "attempt this deadly experiment again."

Local issues and candidates also played a role in the endorsements. Expecting a
Coalition victory, the NT News argued that Solomon Country Liberal MP Natasha
Griggs should be returned on the grounds that Darwin was better off having a
Government member as its representative. Victoria's Herald Sun highlighted the
Country Fire Authority dispute – "a window into the relationship between Labor
and the union movement" and "a game changer in how many Victorians will vote."
The Hobart Mercury concluded that although the nation would be "best served" by
a Coalition government, Denison independent MP Andrew Wilkie and Franklin Labor
MP Julie Collins deserved to be re-elected as well. The Advertiser welcomed
Turnbull's decision to build 12 new submarines in South Australia. The West
Australian reminded voters to separate their judgement of Turnbull from their
judgment of the less popular Liberal state government.

Campaign advertising began in February, with the Government airing
taxpayer-funded commercials for its Innovation and Science Agenda that echoed
Turnbull's catchphrase "exciting time". The ads were criticised by the
Opposition, which referred the matter to the Auditor-General for investigation.

In addition to the major political parties, other organisations aired their own
issue ads. These included the Australian Council of Trade Unions, the Royal
Australian College of General Practitioners, Master Builders Australia and the
Australia Institute.

In Australian federal elections, a "blackout" of campaign ads on radio and
television applies from midnight on the Wednesday before polling day. On the eve
of the blackout in 2016, commercial television stations, media analysts and some
politicians called for this rule to be reviewed in the light of declining
audience share for traditional broadcasters, and the growing role of the
internet in campaigning.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2016_Wimbledon_Championships_%E2%80%93_Women%27s_Singles

Serena Williams was the defending champion and successfully defended her title,
defeating Angelique Kerber in the final, 7–5, 6–3. By winning her seventh
Wimbledon title, Williams equaled Steffi Graf's Open Era record of 22 major
singles titles. This was also the first time two women contested two major
finals against one another in a single season since Amélie Mauresmo and Justine
Henin-Hardenne met in the 2006 Australian Open and Wimbledon finals.

The top five seeds (Williams, Garbiñe Muguruza, Agnieszka Radwańska, Kerber and
Simona Halep) were in contention for the world No. 1 ranking at the beginning of
the tournament. However, Halep was removed from the contention at the end of
third round, while Williams retained the top spot by reaching the fourth round
and eventually winning the title. She also spent her 300th week at the top of
the WTA rankings during the second week of the tournament, and won her 300th
Slam match at the tournament by defeating Annika Beck in the third round.

At 36 years old, Venus Williams became the oldest woman to reach a Grand Slam
semifinal since Martina Navratilova at the 1994 Wimbledon Championships.

Elena Vesnina made her semi-final debut at a Grand Slam on her 42nd appearance,
ten years after debuting at the 2006 Australian Open.

This marked Caroline Wozniacki's first Grand Slam appearance since the 2008
French Open in which she was not a seed



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Juan_Cuadrado

Juan Guillermo Cuadrado Bello (locally: [ˈhwaŋ ɡiˈʝermo kwaˈðɾaðo]; born 26 May
1988) is a Colombian professional footballer who plays as a winger for Italian
club Juventus and the Colombia national team. He is known for his direct style
of play, including his pace (both on and off the ball) as well as his dribbling
skills. He started off in a central role as a defensive midfielder early in his
career before being moved into wider positions in which he now plays as a right
winger.

Having begun his career at Independiente Medellín, Cuadrado moved to Italy in
2009 to join Udinese. Used sparingly at the club, he was loaned to Lecce for the
2011–12 season, where despite relegation from Serie A, his performances earned a
transfer to Fiorentina. In February 2015, he was signed by Chelsea, but after
playing sparingly, was loaned to Juventus, where he won the Serie A title and
the Coppa Italia.

Cuadrado made his senior international debut in 2010, and has since earned over
40 caps. He was part of the Colombian squads which reached the quarter-finals at
two Copa América tournaments and the 2014 FIFA World Cup, also contributing to
his nation's third-place finish at the Copa América Centenario.

Born in Necoclí, Cuadrado began his club career in Atlético Uraba, where his
preferred position was as a forward. However, on the recommendation of club
founder Nelson Gallego, Cuadrado took on a midfielder role, usually as a winger.
Cuadrado's confidence and ability in the position also allowed him to play
occasionally as a full-back. He later had a brief spell at Colombian second
division club Rionegro, where he languished on the bench under coach Víctor
González Scott, but his potential was recognized by Juan José Peláez of
Independiente Medellín. He was eventually signed by Medellin in 2008, allowing
him to return to the first division. That year, Cuadrado made his senior
professional debut against Boyacá Chicó, a match in which he would also score
his first goal. Cuadrado remained in Medellin until 2009 before making the leap
to European football.

On 2 July 2009, Cuadrado signed with Serie A club Udinese on a five-year deal
for an undisclosed fee. He played his first match for Udinese in a 2–1 win
against Chievo as a right wing back. Cuadrado, however, was not given many
first-team minutes for the rest of the season, and he would be sent on loan to
fellow Serie A side Lecce.

On 3 August 2011, it was officially confirmed that Cuadrado would join Lecce for
the 2011–12 season. He scored his first goal for the club against Cesena, the
sole goal in a 1–0 victory. In spite of further impressive performances from
Cuadrado, however, Lecce finished 18th and was relegated from Serie A. He would
then return to Udinese to avoid playing in the second flight. Around this time,
he was watched by an unidentified English club who deemed that at 23 years he
was too old to be signed by the club.

On 23 July 2012, Cuadrado completed his move to Fiorentina, initially in a
temporary deal for a €1 million transfer fee. He scored his first goal for the
Florence club in a 4–1 victory at home against Cagliari. He finished the season
with five goals and six assists, an integral part of a side that finished fourth
in Serie A.[citation needed] In June 2013, La Viola purchased half of the
registration rights of Cuadrado for €5 million.

On 11 February 2014, Cuadrado scored Fiorentina's second goal of a 2–0 Coppa
Italia semi-final second leg victory over his former club Udinese, securing La
Viola a 3–2 aggregate victory and a spot in the final. He was booked after
scoring the winning goal, and suspended for the final, which his team lost 1–3
to Napoli on 3 May.

On 16 June 2014, amid media speculation of a move to a larger club by the
player, Fiorentina agreed a deal to purchase full ownership of Cuadrado's
contract from Udinese, for an additional €12 million.

On 2 February 2015, Premier League club Chelsea announced the signing of
Cuadrado from Fiorentina on a four-and-a-half-year deal, for a reported initial
fee of £23.3 million, which could potentially rise to £26.8 million; Mohamed
Salah went the other way on loan. While in Fiorentina's financial filing of year
2014, in the management report (Italian: Relazione sulla Gestione), Fiorentina
declared the fee was €30 million. Upon signing, Cuadrado said, "I am very happy
and thankful for this opportunity I’ve been given. This is a great club and
honestly it is like a dream to join the Chelsea family and to know that the
manager (José Mourinho) believes in me. I’m happy." His Fiorentina manager,
Vincenzo Montella, stated, "It was a sale that had to be done. Cuadrado is a
player that has always arrived with a smile and given everything to Fiorentina –
I'm happy for him because he is going to a big club." Mourinho commented that he
was not in a "rush" for Cuadrado to fully showcase his abilities within a short
time, as stated in an interview: "He needs time to adapt to the Premier League.
I know Italy and I know the difference between Italy and England; his formation,
his development, his experience – everything was in Italy."

Five days after signing, Cuadrado made his Chelsea debut after replacing Willian
for the last ten minutes of a 2–1 win away against Aston Villa. On 11 February,
he made his first start in his first appearance at Stamford Bridge, playing the
first 70 minutes before being replaced by Cesc Fàbregas in a 1–0 win against
Everton. He won his first Chelsea trophy on 1 March as the club defeated
Tottenham Hotspur 2–0 in the League Cup final, coming on in the 76th minute for
Willian. In response towards the criticism of Cuadrado's lack of immediate
impact, Mourinho argued in an interview, "Everyone believes that he needs to
play all the time or at least every match, but like every player that joins a
new club, he needs time. Time which hasn't been given to Cuadrado. I do believe
that he'll be amazing next season."

On 3 May, Cuadrado made his only third start since his move to Chelsea, in the
match against Crystal Palace, as Ramires was taken ill before the game. At
half-time, however, Cuadrado was substituted for John Obi Mikel; Chelsea ended
up claiming their fifth league title with a 1–0 victory. Three weeks later, in
the final match of the season against Sunderland, he won a penalty when fouled
by John O'Shea, on which Diego Costa evened the score in an eventual 3–1 home
win, but he was later substituted when he was injured in the final minute of the
first half.

On 25 August 2015, Cuadrado signed a season-long loan deal with Juventus for
€1.5 million. Five days later, he made his debut, as a 75th-minute substitute in
a 2–1 defeat away against Roma. On 31 October, Cuadrado scored his first
Juventus goal against Torino to secure a 2–1 win in extra time at the end of the
Derby della Mole. On 16 March 2016, Cuadrado scored his first ever UEFA
Champions League goal in a 4–2 away defeat against Bayern Munich, in the second
leg of the round of 16. On 21 May, he came off the bench to set-up Álvaro
Morata's match-winning goal against Milan in the 110th minute of extra time of
the 2016 Coppa Italia final, in Rome's Stadio Olimpico; Juventus' 1–0 victory
enabled the club to secure the domestic double for the second consecutive
season.

Cuadrado returned to Chelsea on 30 June 2016 and played a few friendlies for
Chelsea, including the 2016 International Champions Cup. On 31 August, however,
Cuadrado returned to Juventus on a three-year loan for €5 million per season,
plus a conditional obligation to buy the full registration rights of Cuadrado
from Chelsea for an additional €20 million (or €15 million and €10 million in
the second and the third year of loan respectively), after playing a certain
number of matches. Chelsea would also receive a maximum of €4 million bonuses,
making the fee potentially raise to €29 million. Cuadrado scored his first
league goal in nine months on 5 February 2017, scoring the only goal in a Derby
d'Italia clash with Inter Milan.

After being transferred to Udinese, Cuadrado received his first call-up to the
Colombia national team, as well as a spot in the starting XI in a match against
Venezuela on 3 September 2010, scoring the opening goal of a 2–0 victory at the
Estadio José Antonio Anzoátegui in Puerto La Cruz.

Cuadrado was in the Colombian squad which reached the quarter-finals of the 2011
Copa América in Argentina. His only appearance of the competition came in their
last group match, a 2–0 victory over Bolivia in Santa Fe, replacing Fredy Guarín
after 50 minutes.

Cuadrado was named in Colombia's 23-man squad for the 2014 FIFA World Cup. In
the third group stage match, a 4–1 victory against Japan, he scored the team's
opening goal on a penalty kick. He would end his World Cup campaign with four
assists, tying Toni Kroos as the competition's assist leader.

Cuadrado played every minute of Colombia's run to the quarter-finals of the 2015
Copa América in Chile, and scored in their penalty shootout defeat against
Argentina.

On 13 October 2015, Cuadrado was sent off at the end of Colombia's 3–0 loss away
against Uruguay in 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification, for elbowing Diego Rolán.

Cuadrado was included in Colombia's 23-man squad for the Copa América
Centenario.

Cuadrado is known for his direct, offensive style of play along the right flank,
and is capable of both scoring goals himself as well as creating goalscoring
opportunities for his teammates. He often utilises his speed and technical
skills to beat opponents in one on one situations and create space and time for
him to shoot on goal, or deliver crosses to strikers in the area. Due to his
playing style and ability to make attacking runs down the wing, he has been
labelled a "traditional" wide midfielder. Tim Vickery, a reporter on South
American football, stated that as Colombia's defensive players played near the
goal in order to cover for veteran centre-back Mario Yepes, Cuadrado's pace,
agility, creativity and dribbling ability on the right wing moved the team
forward at the 2014 World Cup. He also noted that Cuadrado is equally adept as
an attacking right back or wing back, due to his energy and work-rate. A
versatile player, he is also capable of playing on the left, a position which
allows him to cut into the middle and shoot on goal with his stronger, right
foot. In his early career, he was initially deployed as central or defensive
midfielder, and he has also been deployed as a forward or as a second striker on
occasion.

Cuadrado was born in Necoclí as the son of Marcela Bello Guerrero and Guillermo
Cuadrado, a truck driver, and he was raised in Tumaco. His father was shot when
he was five years old. His mother stated in an interview that Cuadrado had to be
a perfect student in order to be able to play football. As of July 2014,
Cuadrado lived with his family in Florence.

Cuadrado features on the Latin American cover of FIFA 16, alongside global cover
star Lionel Messi.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UFC_200

UFC 200: Tate vs. Nunes was a mixed martial arts event held by the Ultimate
Fighting Championship held on July 9, 2016, at the T-Mobile Arena on the Las
Vegas Strip in Paradise, Nevada.

It was the final UFC event under Zuffa ownership, which began in January 2001.
The company subsequently announced its sale to WME-IMG, an American talent
agency with offices in Beverly Hills.

The event was the first that the organization has hosted at T-Mobile Arena,
which opened in April 2016. It took place during the UFC's annual International
Fight Week and marked the second time the UFC hosted three events in consecutive
days.

A welterweight rematch between The Ultimate Fighter 5 winner and former
lightweight title challenger Nate Diaz and current UFC Featherweight Champion
Conor McGregor was originally expected to headline the event. The pairing
previously met earlier in the year at UFC 196. McGregor was expected to
challenge UFC Lightweight Champion Rafael dos Anjos, but dos Anjos pulled out
due to a broken foot only 11 days before the event. Diaz eventually replaced him
and the bout was shifted to the welterweight division. Diaz won the fight via
rear-naked choke in the second round.

On April 19, after McGregor tweeted a supposed retirement, the UFC announced
that he was pulled from the event and a replacement for him was being sought.
UFC President Dana White clarified that McGregor's removal was related to his
refusal to come to a press conference that week, because "he was in Iceland
training and didn't want to ruin his preparation for the fight". McGregor
released a statement two days later, claiming he was not retired and that he
requested the UFC to allow him to focus more on the fight preparation this time,
as he felt he lost his focus during the media obligations for the previous
fight. He then stated that he was ready for the event and would come for a
scheduled New York press conference, but if that's not enough, he "doesn't know
what to say". A report later claimed that the UFC decided to cancel the fight
indeed, in what was rumored to be a $10 million paycheck for McGregor.

On April 27, the UFC officially announced the new headliner as a UFC Light
Heavyweight Championship unification rematch between current champion Daniel
Cormier and former champion Jon Jones, who is also the current interim champion.
The pairing met previously at UFC 182 in January 2015 with Jones defending his
title via unanimous decision. Subsequent to that victory, Jones was stripped of
the title and suspended indefinitely from the UFC in connection with a
hit-and-run incident that he was involved in. Cormier replaced him and went on
to defeat Anthony Johnson at UFC 187 to win the vacant title. Their rematch was
originally expected to take place at UFC 197, but Cormier pulled out three weeks
before the event due to injury and was replaced by Ovince Saint Preux, in what
became an interim title bout. Jones went on to defeat Saint Preux by unanimous
decision and won the interim title.

The event suffered another major hit only three days before it happened, as it
was announced that Jones was pulled out by USADA due to a potential Anti-Doping
Policy violation stemming from an out-of-competition sample collection on June
16. Cormier declared he would still fight if an opponent brought to him "made
sense". Additional information on Jones' situation will be provided as the
process moves forward. A day later Jones apologized for the incident, but denied
knowingly taking any illegal substance. He and his manager also declined to
specify the substance that resulted in the failed test. His "B" sample also came
positive for the same substances and Jones' faces a potential two-year
suspension.

During the UFC Fight Night: dos Anjos vs. Alvarez broadcast, it was announced
that former UFC Middleweight Champion Anderson Silva would replace Jones on less
than two days notice and face Cormier in a three-round non-title light
heavyweight bout.

Due to those major changes, the already scheduled UFC Women's Bantamweight
Championship bout between then champion Miesha Tate and top contender Amanda
Nunes was revealed as the new main event.

On June 4, a few hours before the UFC 199 event, MMAFighting.com reporter Ariel
Helwani broke the news that former UFC Heavyweight Champion Brock Lesnar was
close to finalizing deal to return at this event, despite being active in the
WWE. The UFC confirmed the report, via a teaser video clip on the UFC 199 main
card broadcast. However, Helwani's news scoop earned him a prompt physical
ejection from the event venue and a lifetime ban from covering future UFC live
events. The organization faced a major backlash from the media community as well
as fans, before reinstating Helwani's media credentials. They also stated that
it was their belief "recurring tactics used" by Helwani "extended beyond the
purpose of journalism", a statement that MMAFighting.com disagreed with.

Lesnar faced the 2001 K-1 World Grand Prix winner and former interim title
contender Mark Hunt. Due to Jones' removal from the card, this bout was briefly
promoted as the new main event. However, after the Tate-Nunes bout was announced
as the new headliner, Lesnar-Hunt was once again confirmed as the co-main event.
Lesnar also headlined UFC 100 and with Jones' absence, he and Jim Miller
remained as the only two fighters to compete at both milestone events.

Due to McGregor's experiments outside of his division, an interim UFC
Featherweight Championship bout between former champion José Aldo and former
lightweight champion Frankie Edgar took place at this event. It was a rematch,
as Aldo previously defended his title against Edgar at UFC 156 in 2013 via
unanimous decision.

The main card opened with a heavyweight bout between former two-time champion
Cain Velasquez and Travis Browne.

The featured bout of the preliminary card was a women's bantamweight contest
between former title challenger Cat Zingano and The Ultimate Fighter: Team
Rousey vs. Team Tate winner Julianna Peña. A few other bouts were also part of
the Fox Sports 1 televised prelims:

A lightweight bout between Joe Lauzon and The Ultimate Fighter 1 winner and
former lightweight title challenger Diego Sanchez was originally booked for UFC
180. However, the bout was cancelled due to both fighters being injured. The
fight was later rescheduled for this event and headlined the UFC Fight Pass
preliminary card.

A middleweight bout between former Strikeforce Light Heavyweight Champion Gegard
Mousasi and Derek Brunson was expected to take place at the event, but on June
19 it was announced that Brunson pulled out due to injury and was replaced by
Thiago Santos.

Former PRIDE Lightweight Champion Takanori Gomi and Jim Miller were chosen to
open the event in a lightweight bout.

At the weigh-ins, Hendricks missed weight by a quarter of a pound, weighing in
at 171.25 lbs. He was not given a second attempt to make the weight because the
recently introduced early weigh-in procedures set a 10:00 a.m. cut off time and
Hendricks weighed in at the last possible moment. As a result, he was fined 20%
of his fight purse, which went to Gastelum.

The following is the reported payout to the fighters as reported to the Nevada
State Athletic Commission. It does not include sponsor money and also does not
include the UFC's traditional "fight night" bonuses.

^ Johny Hendricks was fined 20 percent of his purse ($20,000) for failing to
make the required weight for his fight with Kelvin Gastelum. That money was
issued to Gastelum, an NSAC official confirmed.

The event had a $10,700,000 gate, which broke the record for a mixed martial
arts event in the United States. The final attendance was 18,202, a record for
Nevada, which had hosted 104 prior UFC events. The total disclosed payout for
the event reached nearly $7 million at $6,979,000, believed to be the highest
combined disclosed payday in UFC history. Lesnar's fight purse was also the
highest, breaking Conor McGregor's record from UFC 196 by $1.5 million.

On July 15, it was announced that USADA informed Lesnar of a potential
Anti-Doping Policy violation stemming from an out-of-competition sample
collection on June 28 from the WADA-accredited UCLA Olympic Analytical
Laboratory on the evening of July 14. Four days later, USADA announced another
failed test: this time in-competition. It was the same substance, which was not
disclosed. On July 23, reports came that Lesnar tested positive for
hydroxy-clomiphene, which was revealed days earlier as one of the substances
responsible for Jones' test failure. Lesnar was eventually suspended by the NSAC
on December 15 for a period of one year, retroactive to the date of the event
and his win was overturned to a no contest. He was also fined 10% of his purse.
In early January 2017, USADA also suspended Lesnar for the same period, but this
time retroactive to the moment he was provisionally suspended.

On July 18, the NSAC confirmed the substances for which Jones tested positive:
hydroxy-clomiphene, an anti-estrogenic agent and letrozole metabolite, an
aromatase inhibitor. A temporary suspension placed on Jones' Nevada fight
license was subsequently extended by a unanimous vote, while a formal hearing
was expected for September or October. On November 7, USADA announced that Jones
was suspended for a period of one year retroactive to the July 6 date on which
he was provisionally suspended. Two days later, the UFC announced that Jones was
stripped of the interim title. The NSAC also suspended Jones for the same period
as USADA.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bangladesh

Bangladesh (i/ˌbæŋɡləˈdɛʃ/; /ˌbɑːŋɡləˈdɛʃ/; Bengali: বাংলাদেশ Bāṃlādēśa,
pronounced: [ˈbaŋlad̪eʃ] ( listen), literally "The country of Bengal"),
officially the People's Republic of Bangladesh (গণপ্রজাতন্ত্রী বাংলাদেশ
Gaṇaprajātantrī Bāṃlādēśa), is a country in South Asia. It shares land borders
with India and Myanmar (Burma). Nepal, Bhutan and China are located near
Bangladesh but do not share a border with it. The country's maritime territory
in the Bay of Bengal is roughly equal to the size of its land area. Bangladesh
is the world's eighth most populous country. Dhaka is its capital and largest
city, followed by Chittagong which has the country's largest port.

Bangladesh forms the largest and eastern part of the Bengal region. Bangladeshis
include people of different ethnic groups and religions. Bengalis, who speak the
official Bengali, make up 98% of the population. The politically dominant
Bengali Muslims make the nation the world's third largest Muslim-majority
country. Most of Bangladesh is covered by the Bengal delta, the largest delta on
Earth. The country has 700 rivers and 8,046 km (5000 miles) of inland waterways.
Highlands with evergreen forests are found in the northeastern and southeastern
regions of the country. Bangladesh has many islands and a coral reef. It is home
to the Sundarbans, the largest mangrove forest in the world. The country's
biodiversity includes a vast array of plant and wildlife, including critically
endangered Bengal tigers, the national animal.

The Greeks and Romans identified the region as Gangaridai, a powerful kingdom of
the historical subcontinent, in the 3rd century BCE. Archaeological research has
unearthed several ancient cities in Bangladesh, which had international trade
links for millennia. The Bengal Sultanate and Mughal Bengal transformed the
region into a cosmopolitan Islamic imperial power between the 14th and 18th
centuries. The region was home to many principalities which had inland naval
prowess. It was also a notable center of the worldwide muslin and silk trade. As
part of British India, the region was influenced by the Bengali renaissance and
played an important role in anti colonial movements. The Partition of British
India made East Bengal a part of the Dominion of Pakistan; and was renamed as
East Pakistan. The region witnessed the Bengali Language Movement in 1952 and
the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971. After independence, a parliamentary
republic was established. A presidential government was in place between 1975
and 1990, followed by a return to parliamentary democracy. The country has also
been affected by poverty, natural disasters, hunger, dominant party systems and
military coups.

Bangladesh is a middle power and a major developing nation. Listed as one of the
Next Eleven, it has the 46th largest economy. It is one of the largest textile
exporters in the world. Its major trading partners are the European Union, the
United States, China, India, Japan, Malaysia and Singapore. With its
strategically vital location between South, East and Southeast Asia, Bangladesh
is an important promoter of regional connectivity and cooperation. It is a
founding member of SAARC, BIMSTEC, the Bangladesh-China-India-Myanmar Forum for
Regional Cooperation and the Bangladesh Bhutan India Nepal Initiative. It is
also a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, the Developing 8 Countries, the
OIC, the Non Aligned Movement, the Group of 77 and the World Trade Organization.
Bangladesh is one of the largest contributors of United Nations peacekeeping
forces.

The name Bangladesh was originally written as two words, Bangla Desh. Starting
in the 1950s, Bengali nationalists used the term in political rallies in East
Pakistan. The term Bangla is a major name for both the Bengal region and the
Bengali language. The earliest references to the term date to the Nesari plate
in 805 AD. The term "Vangaladesa" is found in South Indian records in the 11th
century.

The term gained official status during the Sultanate of Bengal in the 14th
century. Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah proclaimed himself as the first "Shah of Bangala"
in 1342. The word Bangla became the most common name for the region during the
Islamic period. The Portuguese referred to the region as Bengala in the 16th
century.

The origins of the term Bangla are unclear, with theories pointing to a Bronze
Age proto-Dravidian tribe, the Austric word "Bonga" (Sun god), and the Iron Age
Vanga Kingdom. The Indo-Aryan suffix Desh is derived from the Sanskrit word
deśha, which means "land" or "country". Hence, the name Bangladesh means "Land
of Bengal" or "Country of Bengal".

Stone age tools found in the Greater Bengal region indicate human habitation for
over 20,000 years. Remnants of Copper Age settlements date back 4,000 years.

Ancient Bengal was settled by Austroasiatics, Tibeto-Burmans, Dravidians and
Indo-Aryans in consecutive waves of migration. Major urban settlements formed
during the Iron Age in the middle of the first millennium BCE, when the Northern
Black Polished Ware culture developed in the Indian subcontinent. In 1879, Sir
Alexander Cunningham identified the archaeological ruins of Mahasthangarh as the
ancient city of Pundranagara, the capital of the Pundra Kingdom mentioned in the
Rigveda.

The Wari-Bateshwar ruins are regarded by archaeologists as the capital of an
ancient janapada, one of the earliest city states in the subcontinent. An
indigenous currency of silver punched marked coins dating between 600 BCE and
400 BCE has been found at the site. Excavations of glass beads suggest the city
had trading links with Southeast Asia and the Roman world.

Greek and Roman records of the ancient Gangaridai Kingdom, which according to
legend deterred the invasion of Alexander the Great, are linked to the fort city
in Wari-Bateshwar. The site is also identified with the prosperous trading
center of Souanagoura mentioned in Ptolemy's world map. Roman geographers noted
the existence of a large and important seaport in southeastern Bengal,
corresponding to the modern-day Chittagong region.

The legendary Vanga Kingdom is mentioned in the Indian epic Mahabharata covering
the region of Bangladesh. It was described as a seafaring nation of South Asia.
According to Sinhalese chronicles, the Bengali Prince Vijaya led a maritime
expedition to Sri Lanka, conquering the island and establishing its first
recorded kingdom. The Bengali people also embarked on overseas colonization in
Southeast Asia, including in modern-day Malaysia and Indonesia.

Bengal was ruled by the Mauryan Empire in the 3rd and 2nd centuries BCE. With
their bastions in the Bengal and Bihar regions (collectively known as Magadha),
the Mauryans built the first geographically extensive Iron Age empire in Ancient
India. They promoted Jainism and Buddhism. The empire reached its peak under
emperor Ashoka. They were eventually succeeded by the Gupta Empire in the 3rd
century. According to historian H. C. Roychowdhury, the Gupta dynasty originated
in the Varendra region in Bangladesh, corresponding to the modern-day Rajshahi
and Rangpur divisions. The Gupta era saw the invention of chess, the concept of
zero, the theory of Earth orbiting the Sun, the study of solar and lunar
eclipses and the flourishing of Sanskrit literature and drama.

In classical antiquity, Bengal was divided between various kingdoms. The Pala
Empire stood out as the largest Bengali state established in ancient history,
with an empire covering most of the north Indian subcontinent at its height in
the 9th century. The Palas were devout Mahayana Buddhists. They strongly
patronized art, architecture and education, giving rise to the Pala School of
Painting and Sculptural Art, the Somapura Mahavihara and the universities of
Nalanda and Vikramshila. The proto-Bengali language emerged under Pala rule. In
the 11th-century, the resurgent Hindu Sena dynasty gained power. The Senas were
staunch promoters of Brahmanical Hinduism and laid the foundation of Bengali
Hinduism. They patronized their own school of Hindu art taking inspiration from
their predecessors. The Senas consolidated the caste system in Bengal.

Islam arrived on the shores of Bengal in the late first millennium, brought
largely by missionaries, Sufis and merchants from the Middle East. Some experts
have suggested that early Muslims, including Sa`d ibn Abi Waqqas (an uncle of
the Prophet Muhammad), used Bengal as a transit point to travel to China on the
Southern Silk Road. The excavation of Abbasid Caliphate coins in Bangladesh
indicate a strong trade network during the House of Wisdom Era in Baghdad, when
Arab scientists absorbed pre-Islamic Indian and Greek discoveries. This gave
rise to the system of Indo-Arabic numerals. Writing in 1154, Al-Idrisi noted a
busy shipping route between Chittagong and Basra.

Subsequent Muslim conquest absorbed the culture and achievements of pre-Islamic
Bengali civilization in the new Islamic polity. Muslims adopted indigenous
customs and traditions, including dress, food, and way of life. This included
the wearing of the sari, bindu, and bangles by Muslim women; and art forms in
music, dance, and theater. Muslim rule reinforced the process of conversion
through the construction of mosques, madrasas and Sufi Khanqahs.

The Islamic conquest of Bengal began when Bakhtiar Khilji of the Delhi Sultanate
conquered northern and western Bengal in 1204. The Delhi Sultanate gradually
annexed the whole of Bengal over the next century. By the 14th century, an
independent Bengal Sultanate was established. The rulers of the Turkic Ilyas
Shahi dynasty built the largest mosque in South Asia, and cultivated strong
diplomatic and commercial ties with Ming China.

Jalaluddin Muhammad Shah was the first Bengali convert on the throne. The Bengal
Sultanate was noted for its cultural pluralism. Muslims, Hindus and Buddhists
jointly formed its civil-military services. The Hussain Shahi sultans promoted
the development of Bengali literature. It brought Arakan under its suzerainty
for 100 years.

The sultanate was visited by numerous world explorers, including Niccolò de'
Conti of Venice, Ibn Battuta of Morocco and Admiral Zheng He of China. However,
by the 16th century, the Bengal Sultanate began to disintegrate. The Sur Empire
overran Bengal in 1532 and built the Grand Trunk Road. Hindu Rajas and the
Baro-Bhuyan zamindars gained control of large parts of the region, especially in
the fertile Bhati zone. Isa Khan was the Rajput leader of the Baro-Bhuyans based
in Sonargaon.

In the late 16th-century, the Mughal Empire led by Akbar the Great began
conquering the Bengal delta after the Battle of Tukaroi, where he defeated the
Bengal Sultanate's last rulers, the Karrani dynasty. Dhaka was established as
the Mughal provincial capital in 1608. The Mughals faced stiff resistance from
the Baro-Bhuyans, Afghan warlords and zamindars, but were ultimately successful
in conquering the whole of Bengal by 1666, when the Portuguese and Arakanese
were expelled from Chittagong. Mughal rule ushered economic prosperity, agrarian
reform and flourishing external trade, particularly in muslin and silk textiles.
Mughal Viceroys promoted agricultural expansion and turned Bengal into the rice
basket of the Indian subcontinent. The Sufis gained increasing prominence. The
Baul movement, inspired by Sufism, also emerged under Mughal rule. The Bengali
ethnic identity further crystallized during this period, and the region's
inhabitants were given sufficient autonomy to cultivate their own customs and
literature. The entire region was brought under a stable-long lasting
administration.

By the 18th century, the Bengal Subah included the dominions of Bengal proper,
Bihar and Orissa. It was the wealthiest part of the subcontinent. It generated
50% of Mughal GDP. Its towns and cities were filled with Eurasian traders. Dhaka
became an important center of Mughal administration. The Nawabs of Bengal
established an independent principality in 1717, with their headquarters in
Murshidabad. The Nawabs granted increasing concessions to European trading
powers. Matters reached a climax in 1757, when Nawab Siraj-ud-Daulah captured
the British base at Fort William, in an effort to stem the rising influence of
the East India Company. Siraj-ud-Daulah was betrayed by his general Mir Jafar,
who helped Robert Clive defeat the last independent Nawab at the Battle of
Plassey on 23 June 1757.

The defeat of the last independent Nawab of Bengal at the Battle of Plassey
ushered the rule of the British East India Company in 1757. The British
displaced the ruling Muslim class of Bengal. The Bengal Presidency was
established in 1765, with Calcutta as its capital. The Permanent Settlement
created a feudal system. A number of deadly famines struck the region.

The Mutiny of 1857 was initiated in the Presidency of Bengal, with major revolts
by the Bengal Army in Dacca, Calcutta and Chittagong. Eastern Bengal witnessed
numerous native rebellions, including the Faraizi Movement by Haji Shariatullah,
the activities of Titumir, the Chittagong armoury raid and revolutionary
formations such as the Anushilan Samiti. The Bengal Renaissance flowered as a
result of educational and cultural institutions being established across the
region, especially in East Bengal and the imperial colonial capital Calcutta.
The Presidency of Bengal became the cradle of modern South Asian political and
artistic expression. It included the notable contributions of Raja Ram Mohan
Roy, Mir Mosharraf Hossain, Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar, Sir Syed Ahmed Khan,
Jagadish Chandra Bose, Khan Bahadur Ahsanullah, Rabindranath Tagore, Michael
Madhusudan Dutt, Kazi Nazrul Islam and Begum Rokeya. Gopal Krishna Gokhle, the
mentor of Mahatma Gandhi, remarked that "what Bengal thinks today, India thinks
tomorrow".

During British rule, East Bengal developed a plantation economy centred on the
jute trade and tea production. Its share in world jute supply peaked in the
early 20th century, at over 80%. The Eastern Bengal Railway and the Assam Bengal
Railway served as important trade routes, connecting the Port of Chittagong with
a large hinterland.

As a result of growing demands for educational development in East Bengal, the
British partitioned Bengal in 1905 and created the administrative division of
Eastern Bengal and Assam. Based in Dacca, with Shillong as the summer capital
and Chittagong as the chief port, the new province covered much of the
northeastern subcontinent. The All India Muslim League was formed in Dacca in
1906 and emerged as the standard bearer of Muslims in British India. The
partition of Bengal outraged nationalist Hindus and anti-British Muslims,
leading to the Swadeshi movement by the Indian National Congress. The partition
was annulled in 1911 after a long civil disobedience campaign by the Congress.
The Indian Independence Movement enjoyed strong momentum in the Bengal region,
including the constitutional struggle for the rights of Muslim minorities.

The Freedom of Intellect Movement thrived in the University of Dacca. By the
1930s, the Krishak Praja Party led by A. K. Fazlul Huq and the Swaraj Party led
by C. R. Das came to represent the new Bengali middle class. Huq became the
Prime Minister of Bengal in 1937. With the breakdown of Hindu-Muslim unity in
the British Raj, Huq allied with the Muslim League to present the Lahore
Resolution in 1940, which envisioned independent states in the eastern and
northwestern subcontinent.

During the Second World War, the Japanese Air Force conducted air raids in
Chittagong in 1942, displacing several thousand people. The war-induced Bengal
famine of 1943 claimed the lives of over a million people. Allied forces were
stationed in bases across East Bengal in support of the Burma Campaign.
Axis-allied Subhash Chandra Bose also had a significant following in East
Bengal.

The Muslim League formed a parliamentary government in Bengal in 1943, with Sir
Khawaja Nazimuddin and later H. S. Suhrawardy as its premiers. At the Indian
provincial elections, 1946, the decisive victory of the Bengal Muslim League set
the course for the Partition of British India and the creation of the Dominion
of Pakistan on 14 August 1947. Assam was partitioned in order to allow
Bengali-speaking Sylhet to join East Bengal. There was also an unsuccessful
attempt to form a United Bengal. The Radcliffe Line divided Bengal on religious
grounds, ceding Hindu-majority districts to the Indian dominion, and making
Muslim-majority districts the eastern wing of Pakistan.

East Bengal was the most populous province in the new Pakistani federation led
by Governor General Muhammad Ali Jinnah in 1947, with Dacca as the provincial
capital. While the state of Pakistan was created as a homeland for Muslims of
the former British Raj, East Bengal was also Pakistan's most cosmopolitan
province, being home to peoples of different faiths, cultures and ethnic groups.
In 1950, land reform was accomplished in East Bengal with the abolition of the
permanent settlement and the feudal zamindari system.

The successful Bengali Language Movement in 1952 was the first sign of friction
with West Pakistan. The One Unit scheme renamed the province as East Pakistan in
1955. The Awami League emerged as the political voice of the Bengali-speaking
population, with its leader H. S. Suhrawardy becoming Prime Minister of Pakistan
in 1956. He was ousted after only a year in office due to tensions with West
Pakistan's establishment and bureaucracy.

The 1956 Constitution ended dominion status with Queen Elizabeth II as the last
monarch of the country. Dissatisfaction with the central government increased
over economic and cultural issues. The provincial government of A. K. Fazlul Huq
was dismissed on charges of inciting secession. In 1957, the radical left-wing
populist leader Maulana Bhashani warned that the eastern wing would bid farewell
to Pakistan.

The first Pakistani military coup ushered the dictatorship of Ayub Khan. In
1962, Dacca was designated as the legislative capital of Pakistan in an
appeasement of growing Bengali political nationalism. Khan's government also
constructed the Kaptai Dam which controversially displaced the Chakma population
from their indigenous homeland in the Chittagong Hill Tracts. During the 1965
presidential election, Fatima Jinnah failed to defeat Field Marshal Ayub Khan
despite strong support in East Pakistan.

According to senior international bureaucrats in the World Bank, Pakistan
applied extensive economic discrimination against the eastern wing, including
higher government spending on West Pakistan, financial transfers from East to
West and the use of the East's foreign exchange surpluses to finance the West's
imports. This was despite the fact that East Pakistan generated 70% of
Pakistan's export earnings with jute and tea. East Pakistani intellectuals
crafted the Six Points which called for greater regional autonomy, free trade
and economic independence. The Six Points were championed by Awami League
President Sheikh Mujibur Rahman in 1966, leading to his arrest by the government
of President Field Marshal Ayub Khan on charges of treason. Rahman was released
during the 1969 popular uprising which ousted President Khan from power.

Ethnic and linguistic discrimination was abound in Pakistan's civil and military
services, in which Bengalis were hugely under-represented. In Pakistan's central
government, only 15% of offices were occupied by East Pakistanis. They formed
only 10% of the military. Cultural discrimination also prevailed, causing the
eastern wing to forge a distinct political identity. Pakistan imposed bans on
Bengali literature and music in state media, including the works of Nobel
laureate Rabindranath Tagore. In 1970, a massive cyclone devastated the coast of
East Pakistan killing up to half a million people. The central government was
criticized for its poor response. After the elections of December 1970, calls
for the independence of Bangladesh became stronger.

The fury of the Bengali population was compounded when Sheikh Mujibur Rahman who
led Awami League to win a majority in Parliament in the 1970 elections, was
blocked from taking office. A massive civil disobedience movement erupted across
East Pakistan, with open calls for independence. Sheikh Mujibur Rahman addressed
a huge pro-independence rally in Dacca on 7 March 1971. The Bangladeshi flag was
hoisted for the first time on 23 March 1971, Pakistan's Republic Day.

On 26 March 1971, the Pakistani military junta led by Yahya Khan launched
Operation Searchlight, a sustained military assault on East Pakistan, and
detained the Prime Minister-elect under military custody. The Pakistan Army,
with the help of supporting militias, massacred Bengali students, intellectuals,
politicians, civil servants and military defectors during the 1971 Bangladesh
genocide. Several million refugees fled to neighboring India. Estimates for
those killed throughout the war range between 300,000 and 3 million.

Global public opinion turned against Pakistan as news of atrocities spread, with
the Bangladesh Movement gaining support from prominent political and cultural
figures in the West, including Ted Kennedy, George Harrison, Bob Dylan, Joan
Baez, Victoria Ocampo and Andre Malraux. The Concert for Bangla Desh was held at
Madison Square Garden in New York City to raise funds for Bangladeshi refugees.
It was the first major benefit concert in history and was organized by Beatles
star George Harrison and Indian Bengali sitarist Ravi Shankar.

During the liberation war, Bengali nationalists announced a declaration of
independence and formed the Mukti Bahini (the Bangladeshi National Liberation
Army). The Provisional Government of Bangladesh operated in exile from Calcutta,
India. Led by General M. A. G. Osmani and eleven Sector Commanders, the Mukti
Bahini held the Bengali countryside during the war, and waged wide-scale
guerrilla operations against Pakistani forces. Neighboring India and its leader
Indira Gandhi, a longstanding nemesis of Pakistan, provided crucial support to
the Bangladesh Forces and intervened in support of the provisional government on
3 December 1971. The Soviet Union and the United States dispatched naval forces
to the Bay of Bengal amid a Cold War standoff during the Indo-Pakistani War.
Lasting for nine months, the entire war ended with the surrender of Pakistan's
military to the Bangladesh-India Allied Forces on 16 December 1971. Under
international pressure, Pakistan released Mujib from imprisonment on 8 January
1972, after which he was flown by the Royal Air Force to a million strong
homecoming in Dhaka. Indian troops were withdrawn by 12 March 1972, three months
after the war ended.

The cause of Bangladeshi self-determination was widely recognized around the
world. By the time of its admission for UN membership in August 1972, the new
state was recognized by 86 countries. Pakistan recognized Bangladesh in 1974
after pressure from most of the Muslim world.

After independence, Bangladesh became a secular democracy and a republic within
the Commonwealth. The world's 7th most populous nation at the time was ravaged
by wartime devastation and widespread poverty, receiving massive international
aid as a result. It joined the Non-Aligned Movement and the OIC in 1973,
followed by the United Nations in 1974. The Mujib administration signed a
25-year friendship treaty with India and was courted by Western and Eastern bloc
powers. Bangladesh expressed strong solidarity with Arab countries during the
Arab-Israeli War in 1973, sending medical teams to Egypt and Syria. Mujib's
government faced growing political agitation from left-wing groups, especially
the National Socialist Party. Chakma politician M. N. Larma protested the lack
of recognition for indigenous Chittagong Hill Tracts minorities in the new
constitution. Mujib briefly declared a state of emergency to maintain law and
order.

India, Pakistan and Bangladesh signed tripartite agreement in 1973 calling for
peace and stability in the subcontinent. A nationwide famine occurred in 1974.
In early 1975, Mujib initiated one party socialist rule. On 15 August 1975,
Mujib and most of his family members were assassinated by mid-level army
officers during a military coup. Vice President Khandaker Mushtaq Ahmed was
sworn in as President, with most of Mujib's cabinet intact. Bangladesh was
placed under martial law.

Mushtaq interned four prominent associates of Mujib, including Bangladesh's
first prime minister Tajuddin Ahmad. Two Army uprisings on 3 and 7 November 1975
led to a reorganised structure of power. Between the two coups, the four
interned Awami League leaders were assassinated by army men in Dhaka Central
Jail. Mushtaq was replaced by Justice Abu Sayem as President, while the three
chiefs of the armed services become martial law administrators. A technocrat
cabinet was formed with Moudud Ahmed as Deputy Prime Minister. Bangladesh was
one of the first countries to recognize the provisional revolutionary government
of South Vietnam after the withdrawal of U.S. forces.

Lieutenant General Ziaur Rahman took over the presidency in 1977 when Justice
Sayem resigned. In 1979, President Zia reinstated multi-party politics and
restored civilian rule. He promoted free markets and founded the Bangladesh
Nationalist Party (BNP). Zia reoriented Bangladesh's foreign policy, moving away
from the Awami League's strong ties with India and Soviet Union, and pursued
closer relations with the West. He opposed the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
Domestically, Zia faced as many as 21 coup attempts.

An insurgency began in the Chittagong Hill Tracts, due to demands by the
region's indigenous people for autonomy. The Bangladesh Army was accused of
persecuting the area's diverse ethnic minorities. Zia also advocated the idea of
a South Asian regional community, inspired by the formation of ASEAN. A military
crackdown on Rohingyas in neighboring Burma led to an exodus of several hundred
thousand refugees into southeastern Bangladesh. Zia's rule ended when he was
assassinated by elements of the military in 1981. He was succeeded by Abdus
Sattar, who served in office for less than a year.

Bangladesh's next major ruler was Lieutenant General Hussain Muhammad Ershad. As
President, Ershad pursued administrative reforms, including a devolution scheme
which divided the country into 64 districts and 5 divisions. Ershad hosted the
founding summit of SAARC in Dhaka in 1985, which brought together 7 South Asian
countries, including India, Pakistan, Nepal, Sri Lanka, the Maldives, Bhutan and
Bangladesh, into a landmark regional union. He also expanded the country's road
network and started important projects like the Jamuna Bridge. In 1986, Ershad
restored civilian rule and founded the Jatiya Party. Elections were held in 1986
and 1988. Ershad sent Bangladeshi troops to join the US-led coalition in the
Persian Gulf War after a request from King Fahd. Ershad faced a revolt by
opposition parties and the public in 1990, which coupled with pressure from
Western donors for democratic reforms, forced him to resign on 6 December that
year. He handed over power to Justice Shahabuddin Ahmed. Ershad was later
indicted and convicted on corruption charges. In 1991, Bangladesh reverted to
parliamentary democracy. Former first lady Khaleda Zia led the Bangladesh
Nationalist Party to victory at the general election in 1991 and became the
first female Prime Minister in Bangladeshi history. Zia's finance minister
Saifur Rahman launched a series of economic reforms aimed at liberalizing the
Bangladeshi economy, mirroring similar initiatives by Manmohan Singh in India in
1991. Prime Minister Zia was forced to implement the caretaker government
provision in the constitution in 1996 by the opposition.

At the next election in 1996, the Awami League, headed by Sheikh Hasina, one of
Mujib's surviving daughters, returned to power after 21 years. Hasina ended the
Chittagong Hill Tracts insurgency after a peace accord with PCJSS rebels. She
also secured a treaty with India on sharing the water of the Ganges. Hasina held
a trilateral economic summit between India, Pakistan and Bangladesh in 1999 and
helped establish the D8 grouping with Turkey. The economy took a downturn with a
depletion of foreign exchange reserves. Hasina also refused to export
Bangladesh's natural gas, despite major investment offers from international oil
companies. The Awami League lost again to the Bangladesh Nationalist Party in
the 2001 election. In her second term as Prime Minister, Khaleda Zia signed a
Defence Cooperation Agreement with China.

The economy picked up steam from 2003, with a GDP growth rate of 6% in spite of
the 2005 floods. Zia faced criticism for her alliance with the Jamaat-e-Islami,
which was accused of war crimes in 1971, and accusations against her son Tarique
Rahman of corruption. The Awami League waged a series of strikes against the
government after an assassination attempt on former premier Sheikh Hasina.
Widespread political unrest followed the end of the BNP's tenure in late October
2006. A caretaker government led by the pro-BNP President Iajuddin Ahmed worked
to bring the parties to election within the required ninety days, but was
accused by opposition parties of being biased. At the last minute, the Awami
League announced an election boycott.

On 11 January 2007, the Bangladesh Armed Forces intervened to support both a
state of emergency and a continuing but neutral caretaker government under a
newly appointed Chief Advisor Fakhruddin Ahmed, the former governor of the
Bangladesh Bank. Ahmed strengthened the Anti Corruption Commission and launched
an anti-graft drive, detaining more than 160 people, including politicians,
civil servants, businessmen and two sons of Khaleda Zia. The Awami League won a
landslide majority in the 2008 general election. The BNP boycotted the general
election in 2014 due to Sheikh Hasina's cancellation of the caretaker government
system.

Bangladesh has significantly reduced poverty since it gained independence, with
the poverty rate coming down from 57% in 1990 to 25.6% in 2014. Per-capita
incomes have more than doubled from 1975 levels.[citation needed] Bangladesh has
also achieved successes in human development, including greater life expectancy
than India. The country continues to face challenges of unstable politics,
climate change, religious extremism and inequality.

The geography of Bangladesh is divided between three regions. Most of the
country is dominated by the fertile Ganges-Brahmaputra delta. The northwest and
central parts of the country are formed by the Madhupur and the Barind plateaus.
The northeast and southeast are home to evergreen hill ranges. The Ganges delta
is formed by the confluence of the Ganges (local name Padma or Pôdda),
Brahmaputra (Jamuna or Jomuna), and Meghna rivers and their respective
tributaries. The Ganges unites with the Jamuna (main channel of the Brahmaputra)
and later joins the Meghna, finally flowing into the Bay of Bengal. The alluvial
soil deposited by the rivers when they overflow their banks has created some of
the most fertile plains in the world. Bangladesh has 57 trans-boundary rivers,
making water issues politically complicated to resolve – in most cases as the
lower riparian state to India.

Bangladesh is predominately rich fertile flat land. Most parts of Bangladesh are
less than 12 m (39.4 ft) above sea level, and it is estimated that about 10% of
the land would be flooded if the sea level were to rise by 1 m (3.28 ft). 17% of
the country is covered by forests and 12% is covered by hill systems. The
country's haor wetlands are of significant importance to global environmental
science.

In southeastern Bangladesh, experiments have been done since the 1960s to 'build
with nature'. Construction of cross dams has induced a natural accretion of
silt, creating new land. With Dutch funding, the Bangladeshi government began
promoting the development of this new land in the late 1970s. The effort has
become a multi-agency endeavor, building roads, culverts, embankments, cyclone
shelters, toilets and ponds, as well as distributing land to settlers. By fall
2010, the program will have allotted some 27,000 acres (10,927 ha) to 21,000
families. With an elevation of 1,064 m (3,491 ft), the highest peak of
Bangladesh is Keokradong, near the border with Myanmar.

Straddling the Tropic of Cancer, Bangladesh's climate is tropical with a mild
winter from October to March, and a hot, humid summer from March to June. The
country has never recorded an air temperature below 0 °C (32 °F), with a record
low of 1.1 °C (34.0 °F) in the north west city of Dinajpur on 3 February 1905. A
warm and humid monsoon season lasts from June to October and supplies most of
the country's rainfall. Natural calamities, such as floods, tropical cyclones,
tornadoes, and tidal bores occur almost every year, combined with the effects of
deforestation, soil degradation and erosion. The cyclones of 1970 and 1991 were
particularly devastating. A cyclone that struck Bangladesh in 1991 killed some
140,000 people. In September 1998, Bangladesh saw the most severe flooding in
modern world history. As the Brahmaputra, the Ganges and Meghna spilt over and
swallowed 300,000 houses, 9,700 km (6,000 mi) of road and 2,700 km (1,700 mi) of
embankment, 1,000 people were killed and 30 million more were made homeless,
with 135,000 cattle killed, 50 km2 (19 sq mi) of land destroyed and 11,000 km
(6,800 mi) of roads damaged or destroyed. Two-thirds of the country was
underwater. There were several reasons for the severity of the flooding.
Firstly, there were unusually high monsoon rains. Secondly, the Himalayas shed
off an equally unusually high amount of melt water that year. Thirdly, trees
that usually would have intercepted rain water had been cut down for firewood or
to make space for animals.

Bangladesh is now widely recognised to be one of the countries most vulnerable
to climate change. Natural hazards that come from increased rainfall, rising sea
levels, and tropical cyclones are expected to increase as climate changes, each
seriously affecting agriculture, water and food security, human health and
shelter. It is believed that in the coming decades the rising sea level alone
will create more than 20 million climate refugees. Bangladeshi water is
contaminated with arsenic frequently because of the high arsenic contents in the
soil. Up to 77 million people are exposed to toxic arsenic from drinking water.

Bangladesh is prone to floods, tornados and cyclones. Also, there is evidence
that earthquakes pose a threat to the country. Evidence shows that tectonics
have caused rivers to shift course suddenly and dramatically. It has been shown
that rainy-season flooding in Bangladesh, on the world's largest river delta,
can push the underlying crust down by as much as 6 centimetres, and possibly
perturb faults.

Bangladesh ratified the Rio Convention on Biological Diversity on 3 May 1994. As
of 2014[update], the country is set to revise its National Biodiversity Strategy
and Action Plan.

Bangladesh is located in the Indomalaya ecozone. Its ecology includes a long sea
coastline, numerous rivers and tributaries, lakes, wetlands, evergreen forests,
semi evergreen forests, hill forests, moist deciduous forests, freshwater swamp
forests and flat land with tall grass. The Bangladesh Plain is famous for its
fertile alluvial soil which supports extensive cultivation. The country is
dominated by lush vegetation, with villages often buried in groves of mango,
jackfruit, bamboo, betel nut, coconut and date palm. There are 6000 species of
plant life, including 5000 flowering plants. Water bodies and wetland systems
provide a habitat for many aquatic plants. Water lilies and lotuses grow vividly
during the monsoon. The country has 50 wildlife sanctuaries.

Bangladesh is home to much of the Sundarbans, the world's largest mangrove
forest. It covers an area of 6,000 km2 in the southwest littoral region. It is
divided into three protected sanctuaries- the South, East and West zones. The
forest is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The northeastern Sylhet region is home
to haor wetlands, which is a unique ecosystem. It also includes tropical and
subtropical coniferous forests, a freshwater swamp forest and mixed deciduous
forests. The southeastern Chittagong region covers evergreen and semi evergreen
hilly jungles. Central Bangladesh includes the plainland Sal forest running
along the districts of Gazipur, Tangail and Mymensingh. St. Martin's Island is
the only coral reef in the country.

Bangladesh has an abundance of wildlife in its forests, marshes, woodlands and
hills. The vast majority of animals dwell within a habitat of 150,000 km2. The
Bengal tiger, clouded leopard, saltwater crocodile, black panther and fishing
cat are among the chief predators in the Sundarbans. Northern and eastern
Bangladesh is home to the Asian elephant, hoolock gibbon, Asian black bear and
oriental pied hornbill.

The Chital deer are widely seen in southwestern woodlands. Other animals include
the black giant squirrel, capped langur, Bengal fox, sambar deer, jungle cat,
king cobra, wild boar, mongooses, pangolins, pythons and water monitors.
Bangladesh has one of the largest population of Irrawaddy dolphins and Ganges
dolphins. A 2009 census found 6,000 Irrawaddy dolphins inhabiting the littoral
rivers of Bangladesh. The country has numerous species of amphibians (53),
reptiles (139), marine reptiles (19) and marine mammals (5). It has 628 species
of birds.

Several animals became extinct in Bangladesh during the last century, including
the one horned and two horned rhinoceros and common peafowl. The human
population is concentrated in urban areas, hence limiting deforestation to a
certain extent. Rapid urban growth has threatened natural habitats. Though many
areas are protected under law, a large portion of Bangladeshi wildlife is
threatened by this growth. The Bangladesh Environment Conservation Act was
enacted in 1995. The government has designated several regions as Ecologically
Critical Areas, including wetlands, forests and rivers. The Sundarbans Tiger
Project and the Bangladesh Bear Project are among the key initiatives to
strengthen conservation.

The politics of Bangladesh takes place in the framework of a multiparty
parliamentary representative democracy, modeled on the Westminster system of
unicameral parliamentary government. Traditionally, Bangladesh has been a two
party system since democracy was restored in 1990. However, concerns over the
fairness of elections and annulment of the caretaker government system led to a
boycott of the national election in 2014 by major opposition parties. Critics
have accused the government of trying to turn Bangladesh into a dominant party
state under the ruling Awami League.

The Bangladeshi state has a unitary structure, with the central government in
Dhaka.

Bangladesh's foreign policy follows a principle of friendship to all and malice
to none, which was first articulated by Bengali statesman H. S. Suhrawardy in
1957. Suhrawardy also led East and West Pakistan to join the Southeast Asia
Treaty Organization, CENTO and the Regional Cooperation for Development. After
independence, Bangladesh joined the Commonwealth of Nations and the United
Nations. Today, countries considered as Bangladesh's most important partners
include India, China, Japan, Saudi Arabia, Russia, the United States and the
United Kingdom.

During the Cold War, Bangladesh cultivated good relations with both the United
States and the Soviet Union, but it remained nonaligned with either superpower.
Bangladesh asserted itself in regards to many international issues, including
those affecting decolonized and developing countries. Bangladesh traditionally
places a heavy reliance on multilateral diplomacy, especially in the United
Nations. Since independence, it has twice been elected to the UN Security
Council. Bangladeshi diplomat Humayun Rashid Choudhury served as President of
the United Nations General Assembly.

During the Gulf War in 1991, Bangladesh contributed 2,300 troops to the US-led
multinational coalition for the liberation of Kuwait. It has since become the
world's largest contributor of UN peacekeeping forces, providing 113,000
personnel to 54 UN missions in the Middle East, the Balkans, Africa and the
Caribbean, as of 2014[update]. Bangladeshi aid agencies work in many developing
countries worldwide. An example are the operations of BRAC in Afghanistan, which
benefit 12 million people in that country.

Bangladeshi foreign policy also relies on the country's Islamic heritage, being
an OIC member and the world's third largest Muslim-majority country, and enjoys
fraternal relations with many nations in the Muslim world. It is a founding
member of the Developing 8, along with Turkey, Malaysia, Egypt, Iran, Nigeria,
Pakistan and Indonesia.

Strategically important in South Asia and the Bay of Bengal, Bangladesh is
classified as a middle power. It has diverse political, economic and military
partnerships in the region. It has played a leading role in organizing regional
engagement and development cooperation. The South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation (SAARC) was founded in Dhaka in 1985. Three Bangladeshis have since
served as its Secretary General. The Bangladeshi capital hosts the headquarters
of the Bay of Bengal Initiative (BIMSTEC). The country is part of the
Bangladesh–China–India–Myanmar Forum for Regional Cooperation. It has
prioritized relations with ASEAN members in Southeast Asia. It is a member of
the Indian Ocean Rim Association.

Bangladesh's most important bilateral relations are with the two regional powers
India and China. The relationship with India is bound by shared ideals of
democracy, cultural heritage and the 1971 Liberation War, in which Indian
military and diplomatic support was crucial in defeating Pakistani forces on
Bangladeshi territory. In the early years of Bangladesh's independence, Dhaka
and Delhi enjoyed a strong alliance. However, when military coups began in
Bangladesh during the late 1970s, there was increasing distance between the two
neighbors. Differences emerged over sharing the water of the Ganges. Bangladesh
developed very warm relations with the People's Republic of China in the 1980s.
Defense cooperation rapidly increased as the Bangladeshi military became one of
the largest buyers of Chinese defense equipment, given their relative
cost-effective attractiveness for the Bangladeshi defence budget. China has
supplied Bangladesh with missiles and frigates. China is also one of
Bangladesh's largest trade partners. In more recent years, India has sought to
revive relations with Bangladesh through a strategic partnership focused on
counter-terrorism, aid for infrastructure development and promoting regional
economic integration. Bangladesh and India are the largest trading partners
among SAARC nations. The Indian and Bangladeshi armed forces maintain robust
strategic engagement. Relations with Pakistan have been affected by issues
related to the 1971 genocide and terrorism. Bangladesh enjoys strong ties with
regional neighbors Nepal, Bhutan, Sri Lanka and the Maldives.

Bangladesh's relations with neighboring Myanmar are relatively warm. Myanmar was
one of the first countries to recognize Bangladesh's independence. Relations
were in a brief deadlock due to a naval standoff in 2008 over disputed maritime
territory. In 2012, the two countries resolved their maritime boundary disputes
at the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea. The relationship with
Myanmar is complicated by the persecution of the Rohingya people in Rakhine
State. As of 2016[update], Bangladesh hosts between 300,000 and 500,000 Rohingya
refugees who have fled Myanmarese military crackdowns since 1978. In 2012,
Bangladesh denied entry to further refugees after another spate of sectarian
riots broke out in Rakhine State. Both countries view each other as gateways to
South and Southeast Asia. Their armed forces maintain regular dialogue and both
depend on Chinese military supplies. Thailand is an important ally and economic
partner of Bangladesh, with the two countries sharing strategic interests in the
Bay of Bengal region.

The United States enjoys a warm and strategic partnership with Bangladesh. 76%
of Bangladeshis viewed the United States favorably in 2014. The United States is
Bangladesh's largest foreign investor and trade partner. Bangladesh is the third
largest recipient of American development assistance in Asia after Afghanistan
and Pakistan. Relations with the United Kingdom are long-standing. Bangladesh is
one of the largest recipients of U.K. development aid. Japan and Bangladesh have
strong relations with common strategic and political goals. Japan has been
Bangladesh's largest development partner since independence, providing over
US$11 billion in aid. Relations with the Russian Federation have focused on
trade, nuclear energy and defense supplies. There are also growing trade links
with Latin American nations, particularly Brazil and Mexico.

Bangladesh has a strong record of nuclear nonproliferation as a party to the
Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT) and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty
(CTBT).

As of 2012[update], the current strength of the army is around 300,000 including
reservists, the air force 22,000, and navy 24,000. In addition to traditional
defence roles, the military has been called on to provide support to civil
authorities for disaster relief and internal security during periods of
political unrest. Bangladesh has consistently been the world's largest
contributor to UN peacekeeping forces for many years. In February 2015,
Bangladesh had major deployments in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Liberia,
Darfur, Côte d'Ivoire, Haiti, South Sudan, Lebanon, Cyprus and the Golan
Heights.

Bangladesh is ranked by Freedom House as "Partly Free" in its Freedom in the
World report. Press freedom in Bangladesh is ranked as "Not Free". The Economist
Intelligence Unit classifies the country as a hybrid regime, which is the third
best rank out of four in its Democracy Index. Bangladesh ranked as the 3rd most
peaceful country in South Asia in the Global Peace Index in 2015. In recent
years, the once vibrant civil society and media in Bangladesh have come under
attack from both the ruling Awami League government and far-right Islamic
extremists.

According to Mizanur Rahman, the chairman of the National Human Rights
Commission, 70% of the allegations of human rights violations they receive are
against the law-enforcement agencies. Targets have included Nobel Peace Prize
winner Muhammad Yunus and the Grameen Bank, secularist bloggers, independent and
pro-opposition newspapers and television networks. The United Nations has said
that it was deeply concerned by the government's "measures that restrict freedom
of expression and democratic space".

Bangladeshi security forces, particularly the Rapid Action Battalion (RAB), have
faced strong international condemnation for human rights abuses, including
enforced disappearances, torture and extrajudicial killings. Over 1,000 people
have been killed in extrajudicial killings by RAB since its inception under the
last BNP government. The agency has been singled out by Human Rights Watch and
Amnesty International as a "death squad". They have called for the force to be
disbanded. The British and American governments have been widely criticized for
funding and engaging the force in counter-terrorism operations.

In the Chittagong Hill Tracts, the government is yet to fully implement the
Chittagong Hill Tracts Peace Accord. The Hill Tracts region remains heavily
militarized despite the signing of the peace treaty with indigenous people led
by the United People's Party of the Chittagong Hill Tracts.

Secularism in Bangladesh is legally enshrined in the constitution. Religious
parties are banned from contesting elections, but the government is accused of
courting religious extremist groups for votes. Ambiguities over Islam being the
state religion have been criticized by the United Nations. Despite relative
inter-religious and communal harmony, minorities in Bangladesh have faced
persecution on occasions. The Hindu and Buddhist communities have faced
religious violence from Islamic groups, notably the Jamaat-e-Islami and its
student wing Shibir. The highest vote share achieved by Islamic far right
candidates during Bangladeshi elections was 12% in 2001; the lowest was 4% in
2008.

According to Transparency International, Bangladesh ranked 14th in the list of
countries with the most perceived corruption in 2014. In 2015, the cost of
bribery was at 3.7% of the national budget. The country's Anti Corruption
Commission was highly active under a state of emergency in 2007 and 2008, when
it indicted many leading politicians, bureaucrats and businessmen for graft.
After assuming power in 2009, the Awami League government greatly reduced the
commission's independent powers for investigation and prosecution. Land
administration was the sector in Bangladesh with the largest cost of bibrery in
2015. Education is among the sectors with significant corruption. The police is
highly affected by corruption, too. Corruption affects water supply
significantly.

Bangladesh is divided into eight administrative divisions, each named after
their respective divisional headquarters: Barisal, Chittagong, Dhaka, Khulna,
Mymensingh, Rajshahi, Sylhet and Rangpur.

Divisions are subdivided into districts (zila). There are 64 districts in
Bangladesh, each further subdivided into upazila (subdistricts) or thana. The
area within each police station, except for those in metropolitan areas, is
divided into several unions, with each union consisting of multiple villages. In
the metropolitan areas, police stations are divided into wards, which are
further divided into mahallas.

There are no elected officials at the divisional or district levels, and the
administration is composed only of government officials. Direct elections are
held for each union (or ward), electing a chairperson and a number of members.
In 1997, a parliamentary act was passed to reserve three seats (out of 12) in
every union for female candidates.

Bangladesh is a developing country, with a market-based mixed economy and is
listed as one of the Next Eleven emerging markets. The per capita income of
Bangladesh was US$1,190 in 2014, with a GDP of US$209 billion. In South Asia,
Bangladesh has the third-largest economy after those of India and Pakistan, and
has the second highest foreign exchange reserves after India. The Bangladeshi
diaspora contributed US$15.31 billion in remittances in 2015.

In the early five years of independence, Bangladesh adopted socialist policies
which proved to be a critical blunder by the Awami League. The subsequent
military regime and BNP and Jatiya Party governments restored free markets and
promoted the Bangladeshi private sector. In 1991, finance minister Saifur Rahman
launched a range of liberal reforms. The Bangladeshi private sector has since
rapidly expanded, with numerous conglomerates now driving the economy. Major
industries include textiles, pharmaceuticals, shipbuilding, steel, electronics,
energy, construction materials, chemicals, ceramics, food processing, and
leather goods. Export-oriented industrialization has increased in recent years,
with the country's exports amounting to US$30 billion in FY2014-15. The
predominant export earnings of Bangladesh come from its garments sector. The
country also has a vibrant social enterprise sector, including the Nobel Peace
Prize-winning microfinance institution Grameen Bank and the world's largest
non-governmental development agency BRAC.

The insufficient power supply is a significant obstacle to growth. According to
the World Bank, poor governance, corruption and weak public institutions are
major challenges for Bangladesh's development. In April 2010, Standard & Poor's
awarded Bangladesh a BB- long term credit rating, which is below India and well
above Pakistan and Sri Lanka.

Bangladesh is notable for its fertile land, including the Ganges delta, the
Sylhet Division and the Chittagong Hill Tracts. Agriculture is the single
largest producing sector of the economy since it comprises about 18.6% (data
released on November 2010) of the country's GDP and employs around 45% of the
total labor force. The performance of this sector has an overwhelming impact on
major macroeconomic objectives like employment generation, poverty alleviation,
human resources development and food security. A plurality of Bangladeshis earn
their living from agriculture. The country ranks among the top producers of rice
(4th), potatoes (7th), tropical fruits (6th), jute (2nd), and farmed fish (5th).

Bangladesh is the 7th largest natural gas producer in Asia, ahead of its
neighbor Myanmar. Gas supplies generate 56% of the country's electricity. Major
gas fields are located in northeastern (particularly Sylhet) and southern
(including Barisal and Chittagong) regions. Petrobangla is the national energy
company. The American multinational Chevron produces 50% of Bangladesh's natural
gas. According to geologists, the Bay of Bengal holds large untapped gas
reserves in Bangladesh' exclusive economic zone. The country also has
substantial reserves of coal, with several coal mines operating in northwestern
Bangladesh.

The Bangladesh textile industry and Bangladeshi RMG Sector are the largest
manufacturing sector, accounting for US$25 billion in exports in 2014. Leather
goods manufacturing, particularly in footwear, is the second largest export
oriented industrial sector. The pharmaceutical industry in Bangladesh meets 97%
of domestic demand and exports to 52 countries. The shipbuilding industry in
Bangladesh has seen rapid growth with exports to Europe.

The steel industry in Bangladesh is concentrated in the port city of Chittagong.
The ceramics industry in Bangladesh is a prominent player in the international
ceramics trade. In 2005, Bangladesh was the world's 20th largest cement
producer. The country's cement industry depends on limestone imports from North
East India. Food processing is a major sector of the local economy, with
prominent brands like PRAN that are increasingly gaining an international
market. The electronics industry in Bangladesh is witnessing rapid growth, with
the Walton Group being its dominant player. Bangladesh also has its own defense
industry, including the establishments such as Bangladesh Ordnance Factories and
the Khulna Shipyard.

The service sector accounts for 51% of GDP. Bangladesh ranks with Pakistan in
having the second largest banking sector in South Asia. The Dhaka Stock Exchange
and the Chittagong Stock Exchange are the twin financial markets of the country.
The telecoms industry in Bangladesh is one of the fastest growing markets in the
world, with 114 million cellphone subscribers in December 2013. The main telecom
companies are Grameenphone, Banglalink, Robi, and BTTB. Tourism in Bangladesh is
a developing sector, with the beach resort town of Cox's Bazar being the center
of the industry. The Sylhet region, home to Bangladesh's tea country, also
receives a large number of visitors. Bangladesh has three UNESCO World Heritage
Sites, and five tentative listed sites.

Microfinance was pioneered in Bangladesh by Muhammad Yunus and has been
replicated in many countries. There are more than 35 million microcredit
borrowers.

Transport is a major sector in the Bangladesh economy. The aviation industry has
seen rapid growth and includes the national flag carrier Biman Bangladesh
Airlines and other privately owned airlines. Bangladesh has 3 international
airports and several domestic and STOL airports. The Shahjalal International
Airport- the busiest among them- connects country's capital Dhaka with many
major destinations across the continents.

The country has a 2,706-kilometre (1,681-mile) rail network operated by the
Bangladesh Railway. Total length of country's roads and highways network is
nearly 21,000-kilometre (13,000-mile).

It has one of the largest inland waterway networks in the world, with 8,046
kilometres (5,000 miles) of navigable waterways. The southeastern Port of
Chittagong is its busiest seaport, handling over US$60 billion in annual trade.
More than 80% of the country's export-import trade passes through Chittagong.
The second busiest seaport is Mongla in southwestern Bangladesh.

Electricity generation in Bangladesh had an installed capacity of 10,289 MW in
January 2014. Commercial energy consumption is mostly natural gas (around 56%),
followed by oil, hydropower and coal.

Nuclear energy in Bangladesh is being developed with Russia in the landmark
Ruppur Nuclear Power Plant project.

In renewable energy, Bangladesh has the fifth-largest number of green jobs in
the world. Solar panels are increasingly used to power both urban and off grid
rural areas.

The share of the population with access to an improved water source was
estimated at 98% in 2004, a very high level for a low-income country. This has
been achieved to a large extent through the construction of handpumps with the
support of external donors. However, in 1993 it was discovered that groundwater,
the source of drinking water for 97% of the rural population and a significant
share of the urban population, is in many cases naturally contaminated with
arsenic.

Another challenge is the low level of cost recovery due to low tariffs and poor
economic efficiency, especially in urban areas where revenues from water sales
do not even cover operating costs. Concerning sanitation, estimated 56% of the
population have had access to adequate sanitation facilities in 2010. A new
approach to improve sanitation coverage in rural areas, the community-led total
sanitation concept that has been first introduced in Bangladesh, is credited for
having contributed significantly to the increase in sanitation coverage since
2000.

SPARRSO, Bangladesh's space agency, was founded in 1983 with assistance from the
United States. Bangladesh plans to launch the Bangabandhu-1 communications
satellite in 2018. The Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission operates a TRIGA
research reactor at its atomic energy facility in Savar. The Bangladesh Council
of Scientific and Industrial Research was founded in 1973, and traces to its
roots to the East Pakistan Regional Laboratories established in Dhaka (1955),
Rajshahi (1965) and Chittagong (1967).

Bangladesh has a large number of trained IT professionals. But as the majority
of the businesses have not become large enough and on the other hand due to
negligence from the part of business owners to understand the benefits of using
software and technology in businesses the local demand for these highly skilled
professionals has been low. As a result, the IT industry in Bangladesh has
turned its focus on exporting software and IT services. Currently it is in 26th
position of global IT outsourcing destination. The primary reason behind this is
Bangladeshi IT companies are providing high quality services at a much lower
cost than its competitors. It is currently estimated that the volume of IT
outsourcing is doubling every year in Bangladesh. Several Bangladeshi IT
companies has been successful in the global enterprise software market.
Bangladeshi Government is envisioning IT sector as the second largest export
sector after Garments in the coming years.

Estimates of the Bangladeshi population vary but most recent data suggest 162 to
168 million people (2015). However, the 2011 census estimated 142.3 million,
much less than recent (2007–2010) estimates of Bangladesh's population ranging
from 150 to 170 million. Bangladesh is thus the 8th most populous nation in the
world. In 1951, the population was only 44 million. It is also the most densely
populated large country in the world, and it ranks 11th in population density,
when very small countries and city-states are included.

Bangladesh's population growth rate was among the highest in the world in the
1960s and 1970s, when its population grew from 65 to 110 million. With the
promotion of birth control in the 1980s, the growth rate began to slow. The
fertility rate now stands at 2.55, lower than India (2.58) and Pakistan (3.07).
The population is relatively young, with 34% aged 15 or younger and 5% 65 or
older. Life expectancy at birth is estimated to be 70 years for both males and
females in 2012. Despite the rapid economic growth, 43% of the country still
lives below the international poverty line which means living on less than $1.25
per day. Bengalis constitute 98% of the population.

Minorities include indigenous people in the Chittagong Hill Tracts and other
parts of northern Bangladesh. The Hill Tracts are home to 11 ethnic tribal
groups, notably the Chakma, Marma, Tanchangya, Tripuri, Kuki, Khiang, Khumi,
Murang, Mru, Chak, Lushei and Bawm. The Sylhet Division is home to the
Bishnupriya Manipuri, Khasi and Jaintia tribes. The Mymensingh District has a
substantial Garo population. The northern Bangladesh region is home to
aboriginal Santal, Munda and Oraon people. Bangladesh is also home to a
significant Ismaili community.

The southeastern region has received an influx of Rohingya refugees from Burma,
particularly during Burmese military crackdowns in 1978 and 1991. During renewed
sectarian unrest in Rakhine State in 2012, Bangladesh closed its borders amid
fears of a third major exodus from Burma. Stranded Pakistanis or Biharis are a
contentious dispute between Bangladesh and Pakistan. In 2008, the Bangladesh
High Court granted full citizenship to all second generation Stranded Pakistanis
born after 1971. The Hill Tracts region suffered unrest and an insurgency from
1975 to 1997 due to a movement by indigenous people for autonomy. A peace accord
was signed in 1997; however, the region remains heavily militarized.

Dhaka is the capital and largest city of Bangladesh. The cities with a city
corporation, having mayoral elections, include Dhaka South, Dhaka North,
Chittagong, Khulna, Sylhet, Rajshahi, Barisal, Rangpur, Comilla and Gazipur.
Other major cities, these and other municipalities electing a chairperson,
include Mymensingh, Gopalganj, Jessore, Bogra, Dinajpur, Saidpur, Narayanganj
and Rangamati. Both the municipal heads are elected for a span of five years.

Bangla (Bengali) being the sole official language, English is sometimes used
secondarily for official purposes, especially in the judiciary.

More than 98% of Bangladeshis speak Bangla as their native language. English is
also used as a second language among the middle and upper classes and is also
widely used in higher education and the legal system. Historically, laws were
written in English and were not translated into Bangla until 1987. Bangladesh's
Constitution and all laws are now in both English and Bangla.

Stranded Pakistani Biharis since 1971 living in various camps in Bangladesh
speak Urdu. Similarly, Rohingya Refugees from Burma since 1978 living in various
camps in Bangladesh speak Rohingya. There are also several indigenous minority
languages.

Islam is the largest religion in Bangladesh, adhered to by about 86.6% of the
population. The country is home to most Bengali Muslims, the second largest
ethnic group in the Muslim world. The majority of Bangladeshi Muslims are Sunni,
followed by the Shia and Ahmadiya. Roughly 4% are non-denominational Muslims.
Bangladesh has the fourth-largest Muslim population in the world and is the
third-largest Muslim-majority country after Indonesia and Pakistan.

Hinduism is followed by about 12.1% of the population, with most being Bengali
Hindus and a small segment being ethnic people. Bangladeshi Hindus are the
country's second biggest religious group and the third largest Hindu community
in the world after those of India and Nepal. Hindus in Bangladesh are almost
evenly distributed in all regions, with large concentrations in Gopalganj,
Dinajpur, Sylhet, Sunamganj, Mymensingh, Khulna, Jessore, Chittagong and parts
of Chittagong Hill Tracts. And despite their dwindling numbers, Hindus are the
second-largest religious community after the Muslims in Dhaka.

Buddhism is the third largest religion, at 0.6%. Bangladeshi Buddhists are
largely concentrated among ethnic groups in the Chittagong Hill Tracts,
particularly the Chakma, Marma and Tanchangya peoples; while coastal Chittagong
is home to the large number of Bengali Buddhists.

Many people in Bangladesh practice Sufism, which has a long heritage in the
region. The largest gathering of Muslims in the country is the Bishwa Ijtema,
held annually by the Tablighi Jamaat. The Ijtema is the second largest Muslim
congregation in the world after the Hajj.

The Constitution of Bangladesh declares Islam as the state religion, but bans
religion-based politics. It proclaims equal recognition of Hindus, Buddhists,
Christians and people of all faiths. Earlier in 1972, Bangladesh became the
first constitutionally secular country in South Asia. The U. S. State Department
describes Bangladesh as a secular pluralistic democracy.

Bangladesh has a low literacy rate, estimated at 66.5% for males and 63.1% for
females in 2014. The educational system in Bangladesh is three-tiered and highly
subsidized. The government operates many schools in the primary, secondary, and
higher secondary levels. It subsidises parts of the funding for many private
schools. In the tertiary education sector, the government funds more than 15
state universities through the University Grants Commission.

The education system is divided into five levels: Primary (from grades 1 to 5),
Junior Secondary (from grades 6 to 8), Secondary (from grades 9 to 10), Higher
Secondary (from grades 11 to 12) and tertiary. The five years of lower secondary
education concluded with a Secondary School Certificate (SSC) examination, but
since 2009 it concludes with a Primary Education Closing (PEC) examination.
Earlier, students who pass this examination proceed to four years secondary or
matriculation training, which culminate in a Secondary School Certificate (SSC)
Examination.

Primary Education Closing (PEC) passed examinees proceed to three years Junior
Secondary, which culminate in a Junior School Certificate (JSC) Examination.
Students who pass this examination proceed to two years secondary or
matriculation training, which culminate in a Secondary School Certificate (SSC)
examination. Students who pass this examination proceed to two years of Higher
Secondary or intermediate training, which culminate in a Higher Secondary School
Certificate (HSC) examination.

Education is mainly offered in Bengali, but English is commonly taught and used.
A large number of Muslim families send their children to attend part-time
courses or even to pursue full-time religious education, which is imparted in
Bengali and Arabic in madrasahs.

Bangladesh conforms fully to the Education For All (EFA) objectives, the
Millennium Development Goals (MDG) and international declarations. Article 17 of
the Bangladesh Constitution provides that all children between the ages of six
and ten years receive a basic education free of charge.

Universities in Bangladesh are mainly categorized into three types: public
(government owned and subsidized), private (private sector owned universities)
and international (operated and funded by international organizations).
Bangladesh has 34 public, 64 private and two international universities.
Bangladesh National University has the largest enrollment among them and
University of Dhaka (established 1921) is the oldest. Islamic University of
Technology, commonly known as IUT, is a subsidiary organ of the Organisation of
the Islamic Cooperation (OIC), representing 57 member countries from Asia,
Africa, Europe and South America. Asian University for Women in Chittagong is
the preeminent liberal arts university for women in South Asia, representing 14
countries from Asia. The faculty members are from many well-known academic
institutions of North America, Europe, Asia, Australia, and the Middle East.
BUET, CUET, KUET, RUET are the four public engineering universities in the
country. BUTex and DUET are two specialized engineering universities, where
BUTex specializes in Textile Engineering and DUET offers higher education to
Diploma Engineers.There are only one public-private partnership specilized
institute NITER which provide Textile Engineering highr education. There are
some science and technology universities including SUST, PUST, JUST, NSTU etc.

Bangladeshi universities are accredited by and affiliated with the University
Grants Commission (UGC), created according to the Presidential Order (P.O. No 10
of 1973) of the government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh.

Medical education is provided by 29 government and some other private medical
colleges. All medical colleges are affiliated with Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare.

Recently the literacy rate of Bangladesh has improved as it stands at 71% as of
2015[update] due to the modernization of schools and education funds. At
present, 16,087 schools and 2,363 colleges were getting Monthly Pay Order (MPO)
facilities. 27,558 madrasas, and technical and vocational institutions were
enlisted for the facilities. 6036 educational institutions were outside the MPO
coverage and that the ruling party enlisted 1,624 private schools for MPO in
2010.

Health and education levels remain relatively low, although they have improved
recently as poverty levels have decreased. In the rural areas, village doctors
with little or no formal training constitute 62% of the healthcare providers
practicing modern medicine and the formally trained providers are occupying a
mere 4% of the total health workforce. A survey conducted by Future Health
Systems revealed significant deficiencies in treatment practices of village
doctors, with a wide prevalence of harmful and inappropriate drug prescriptions.
There are market incentives for accessing health care through informal providers
and it is important to understand these markets in order to facilitate
collaboration across actors and institutions in order to provide incentives for
better performance.

A 2007 study of 1000 households in rural Bangladesh found that direct costs
(payment to formal and informal health care providers) and indirect costs (loss
of earnings associated with workdays lost because of illness) associated with
illness were important deterrents to accessing health care from qualified
healthcare providers. A community survey with 6183 individuals in rural
Bangladesh found a clear gender difference in treatment-seeking behaviour, with
women less likely to seek treatment compared to men. The use of skilled birth
attendants, however, has risen between 2005 and 2007 by women in all wealth
quintiles except the highest quintile. A pilot community empowerment tool,
called a health watch, was successfully developed and implemented in
south-eastern Bangladesh in order to improve uptake and monitoring of public
health services.

The poor health conditions in Bangladesh is attributed by the lack of healthcare
and services provision by the government. The total expenditure on healthcare as
a percentage of their GDP was only 3.35% in 2009, according to a World Bank
report published in 2010. The number of hospital beds per 10,000 population is
3. The General government expenditure on healthcare as a percentage of total
government expenditure was only 7.9% as of 2009[update] and the citizens pay
most of their health care bills as the out-of-pocket expenditure as a percentage
of private expenditure on health is 96.5%.

Malnutrition has been a persistent problem for the poverty-stricken country. The
World Bank estimates that Bangladesh is ranked 1st in the world of the number of
children suffering from malnutrition. In Bangladesh, 26% of the population are
undernourished and 46% of the children suffers from moderate to severe
underweight problem. 43% of children under 5 years old are stunted. One in five
preschool age children are vitamin A deficient and one in two are anemic. Child
malnutrition in Bangladesh is amongst the highest in the world. Two-thirds of
the children, under the age of five, are under-nourished and about 60% of them,
who are under six, are stunted. More than 45 percent of rural families and 76
percent of urban families were below the acceptable caloric intake level.

The recorded history of art in Bangladesh can be traced to the 3rd century BCE,
when terracotta sculptures were made in the region. In classical antiquity, a
notable school of sculptural Hindu, Jain and Buddhist art developed in the Pala
Empire and the Sena dynasty. Islamic art evolved since the 14th century. The
architecture of the Bengal Sultanate saw a distinct style of domed mosques with
complex niche pillars and no minarets. Mughal Bengal's most celebrated artistic
tradition was the weaving of Jamdani motifs on fine muslin, which is now
classified by UNESCO as an intangible cultural heritage. Jamdani motifs were
similar to Iranian textile art (buta motif) and Western textile art (paisley).
The Jamdani weavers in Dhaka received imperial patronage. Ivory and brass were
also widely used in Mughal art. Pottery is widely used in Bengali culture.

The modern art movement in Bangladesh took shape during the 1950s, particularly
with the pioneering works of Zainul Abedin. East Bengal developed its own
modernist painting and sculpture traditions, which were distinct from art
movements in West Bengal. The Art Institute Dhaka has been an important center
of visual art in the region. Its annual Bengali New Year parade was enlisted as
an intangible cultural heritage by UNESCO in 2016.

Modern Bangladesh has produced many of South Asia's leading painters, including
SM Sultan, Mohammad Kibria, Shahabuddin Ahmed, Kanak Chanpa Chakma, Kafil Ahmed,
Saifuddin Ahmed, Qayyum Chowdhury, Rashid Choudhury, Quamrul Hassan, Rafiqun
Nabi and Syed Jahangir among others. Novera Ahmed and Nitun Kundu were pioneers
of modernist sculptures in the country.

The oldest evidence of writing in Bangladesh is the Mahasthan Brahmi
Inscription, which dates back to the 3rd century BCE. During the Gupta Empire,
Sanskrit literature thrived in the region. Bengali developed from Sanskrit and
Magadhi Prakrit in the 11th century. Bengali literature is a millennium old
tradition. The Charyapada are the earliest examples of Bengali poetry. Sufi
spiritualism inspired many Bengali Muslim writers. During the Bengal Sultanate,
medieval Bengali writers were influenced by Arabic and Persian works. Syed Alaol
was a noted secular poet and translator. The Chandidas are an example of
Bangladeshi folk literature which developed during the Middle Ages. The Bengal
Renaissance shaped the emergence of modern Bengali literature, including novels,
short stories and science fiction. Rabindranath Tagore was the first
non-European laureate of the Nobel Prize in Literature and is described as the
Bengali Shakespeare. Kazi Nazrul Islam was a revolutionary poet who espoused
spiritual rebellion against colonialism and fascism. Begum Rokeya was a pioneer
of Bengali writing in English, with her early of work of feminist science
fiction. Other renaissance icons included Michael Madhusudan Dutt and Sarat
Chandra Chattopadhyay.

The writer Syed Mujtaba Ali is noted for his cosmopolitan Bengali worldview.
Humayun Ahmed was a popular writer of modern Bangladeshi magical realism and
science fiction. Shamsur Rahman was the poet laureate of Bangladesh for many
years. Jasimuddin was a renowned pastoral poet. Farrukh Ahmed, Sufia Kamal,
Kaiser Haq and Nirmalendu Goon are important figures of modern Bangladeshi
poetry. Notable writers of Bangladeshi novels include Mir Mosharraf Hossain,
Akhteruzzaman Elias, Syed Waliullah, Shahidullah Kaiser, Shawkat Osman, Selina
Hossain, Taslima Nasreen, Haripada Datta, Razia Khan, Anisul Hoque, Al Mahmud,
Bipradash Barua, Tahmima Anam, Neamat Imam, Monica Ali and Zia Haider Rahman.
Many Bangladeshi writers, such as Muhammad Zafar Iqbal, K. Anis Ahmed and Farah
Ghuznavi, are acclaimed for their short stories.

The annual Ekushey Book Fair and Dhaka Literature Festival organized by the
Bangla Academy are among the largest literary festivals in South Asia.

Although, as of 2015[update], several women occupy major political office in
Bangladesh, the women of the country continue to suffer under a patriarchal
social regime where violence is common. Whereas in India and Pakistan women
participate less in the workforce as their education increases, in Bangladesh
there is an opposite trend.

Bengal has a long history of feminist activism dating back to the 19th century.
Roquia Sakhawat Hussain and Faizunnessa Chowdhurani played an important role in
emancipating Bengali Muslim women from the purdah in undivided Bengal and
promoting girls' education. Several women were elected to the Bengal Legislative
Assembly in the British Raj. The first women's magazine Begum was published in
1948.

Female workforce participation in Bangladesh is among the highest in the Muslim
world, at 59%. Women dominate blue collar jobs in the Bangladeshi garment
industry. Agriculture, social services, healthcare and education are also major
occupations for Bangladeshi women; while employment in white collar jobs has
steadily increased.

The architectural traditions of Bangladesh have a 2,500-year-old heritage.
Terracotta architecture is a distinct feature of Bengal. Pre-Islamic Bengali
architecture reached its pinnacle during the Pala Empire, when the Pala School
of Sculptural Art established grand structures such as the Somapura Mahavihara.
Islamic architecture began developing under the Bengal Sultanate, when local
terracotta styles influenced medieval mosque construction. The Adina Mosque of
undivided Bengal was the largest mosque built in the Indian subcontinent.

The Sixty Dome Mosque was the largest medieval mosque built in Bangladesh, and
is a fine example of Turkic-Bengali architecture. The Mughal style replaced
indigenous architecture when Bengal became a province of the Mughal Empire and
influenced the development of urban housing. The Kantajew Temple and Dhakeshwari
Temple are excellent examples of late medieval Hindu temple architecture.
Indo-Saracenic Revival architecture, based on Indo-Islamic styles, flourished
during the British period. The zamindar gentry in Bangladesh built numerous
Indo-Saracenic palaces and country mansions, such as the Ahsan Manzil, Tajhat
Palace, Dighapatia Palace, Puthia Rajbari and Natore Rajbari.

Bengali vernacular architecture is noted for pioneering the bungalow.
Bangladeshi villages consist of thatched roofed houses made of natural materials
like mud, straw, wood and bamboo. In modern times, village bungalows are
increasingly made of tin.

Muzharul Islam was the pioneer of Bangladeshi modern architecture. His varied
works set the course of modern architectural practice in the country. Islam
brought leading global architects, including Louis Kahn, Richard Neutra, Stanley
Tigerman, Paul Rudolph, Robert Boughey and Konstantinos Doxiadis, to work in
erstwhile East Pakistan. Louis Kahn was chosen to design the National Parliament
Complex in Sher-e-Bangla Nagar. Kahn's monumental designs, combining regional
red brick aesthetics, his own concrete and marble brutalism and the use of lakes
to represent Bengali geography, are regarded as one of the masterpieces of the
20th century. In more recent times, award-winning architects like Rafiq Azam
have set the course of contemporary architecture by adopting influences from
Islam and Kahns' works.

Theatre in Bangladesh includes various forms, with a history dating back to the
4th century AD. It includes narrative forms, song and dance forms,
supra-personae forms, performances with scroll paintings, puppet theatre and
processional forms. The Jatra is the most popular form of Bengali folk theatre.
The dance traditions of Bangladesh include indigenous tribal and Bengali dance
forms, as well as classical Indian dances, including the Kathak, Odissi and the
Manipuri dances.

The music of Bangladesh features the Baul mystical tradition, listed by UNESCO
as a Masterpiece of Intangible Cultural Heritage. Numerous lyric based musical
traditions exist including Gombhira, Bhatiali and Bhawaiya, varying from one
region to the next. Folk music is accompanied by the ektara, an instrument with
only one string. Other instruments include the dotara, dhol, flute, and tabla.
Bengali classical music includes Tagore songs and Nazrul geeti. Bangladesh has a
rich tradition of Indian classical music, which uses instruments like the sitar,
tabla, sarod and santoor.

Bangladeshi martial arts evolved in villages where zamindars employed large
private armies to protect their landholdings. The Lathi khela and Boli Khela are
two major forms of Bengali martial arts.

The Nakshi Kantha is a centuries-old embroidery tradition for quilts, said to be
indigenous to eastern Bengal (Bangladesh). The sari is the national dress for
Bangladeshi woman. Mughal Dhaka was renowned for producing the finest muslin
saris, including the famed Dhakai and Jamdani, the weaving of which is listed by
UNESCO as one of the masterpieces of humanity's intangible cultural heritage.
Bangladesh also produces the Rajshahi silk. The shalwar kameez is also widely
worn by Bangladeshi women. In urban areas some women can be also seen in western
clothing. The kurta and sherwani are the national dresses of Bangladeshi men.
The lungi and dhoti is worn by Bengali men in informal settings. The handloom
industry supplies of 60–65% of clothing demand. Aside from ethnic wear,
domestically tailored suits and neckties are usually worn by men in the country,
and it is customary in offices, schools and social events.

The Bengali ethnic fashion industry has flourished well in the changing
environment of the fashion world. The retailer Aarong is one of the most
successful ethnic wear brands in South Asia. The development of the Bangladesh
textile industry, which supplies leading international brands, has promoted the
production and retail of modern Western attire locally, with the country now
having a number of expanding local brands like Westecs and Yellow. Bangladesh is
the world's second largest garments exporter.

Among Bangladesh's fashion designers, Bibi Russell has achieved international
acclaim for her "Fashion for Development" shows.

White rice is the staple of Bangladeshi cuisine, along with many vegetables and
lentils. Rice preparations also include Bengali biryanis, pulaos, and khichuris.
Mustard sauce, ghee, sunflower oil and fruit chutneys are widely used in
Bangladeshi cooking. Fish is the main source of protein in Bengali cuisine. The
Hilsa is the national fish and immensely popular across Bangladesh. Other fishes
eaten include rohu, butterfish, catfish, tilapia and barramundi. Fish eggs are a
gourmet delicacy. Seafood holds an important place in Bengali cuisine,
especially lobsters, shrimps and dried fish. Meat consumption includes chicken,
beef, mutton, venison, duck and squab. In Chittagong, Mezban feasts are a
popular tradition featuring the serving of hot beef curry. In Sylhet, the
shatkora lemons are used to marinate dishes. In the tribal Hill Tracts, bamboo
shoot cooking is prevalent. Bangladesh has a vast spread of desserts, including
distinctive sweets like Rôshogolla, Rôshomalai, Chomchom, Mishti Doi and
Kalojaam. Pithas are traditional boiled desserts made with rice or fruits. Halwa
is served during religious festivities. Naan, paratha, luchi and bakarkhani are
the main local breads. Black tea is offered to guests as a gesture of welcome.
Kebabs are widely popular across Bangladesh, particularly seekh kebabs, chicken
tikka and shashliks.

Bangladesh shares its culinary heritage with the neighboring Indian state of
West Bengal. The two regions have several differences, however. In
Muslim-majority Bangladesh, meat consumption is greater; whereas in
Hindu-majority West Bengal, vegetarianism is more prevalent. The Bangladeshi
diaspora dominates the South Asian restaurant industry in many Western
countries, particularly in the United Kingdom.

Pohela Boishakh, the Bengali new year, is the major festival of Bengali culture
and sees widespread festivities. Of the major holidays celebrated in Bangladesh,
only Pohela Boishakh comes without any preexisting expectations (specific
religious identity, culture of gift-giving, etc.). Unlike holidays like Eid
al-Fitr, where dressing up in lavish clothes has become a norm, or Christmas
where exchanging gifts has become an integral part of the holiday, Pohela
Boishakh is really about celebrating the simpler, rural roots of the Bengal. As
a result, more people can participate in the festivities together without the
burden of having to reveal one's class, religion, or financial capacity. Other
cultural festivals include Nabonno, and Poush Parbon both of which are Bengali
harvest festivals.

The Muslim festivals of Eid al-Fitr, Eid al-Adha, Milad un Nabi, Muharram, Chand
Raat, Shab-e-Barat; the Hindu festivals of Durga Puja, Janmashtami and Rath
Yatra; the Buddhist festival of Buddha Purnima, which marks the birth of Gautama
Buddha, and Christian festival of Christmas are national holidays in Bangladesh
and see the most widespread celebrations in the country.

Alongside there are national days like the remembrance of 21 February 1952
Language Movement Day (International Mother Language Day), Independence Day and
Victory Day. On Language Movement Day, people congregate at the Shaheed Minar in
Dhaka to remember the national heroes of the Bengali Language Movement, and at
the Jatiyo Smriti Soudho on Independence Day and Victory Day to remember the
national heroes of the Bangladesh Liberation War. These occasions are observed
with public ceremonies, parades, rallies by citizens, political speeches, fairs,
concerts, and various other public and private events celebrating the history
and traditions of Bangladesh. TV and radio stations broadcast special programs
and patriotic songs. And many schools and colleges organise fairs, festivals,
and concerts in which citizens from all levels of society can participate.

Cricket is one of the most popular sports in Bangladesh, followed by football.
The national cricket team participated in their first Cricket World Cup in 1999,
and the following year was granted elite Test cricket status. But they have
struggled to date, recording only ten Test match victories: eight against
Zimbabwe with five in 2005 and three in 2014, the other two came in a 2–0 series
victory over the West Indies in 2009.

The team has been more successful in One Day International cricket. In July
2010, they celebrated their first ever win over England in any form of match.
Later in 2010, they beat New Zealand for the first time. In late 2012, they won
a five-match home ODI series 3-2 against a full-strength West Indies National
team. In 2011, Bangladesh successfully co-hosted the ICC Cricket World Cup 2011
with India and Sri Lanka. In 2012, the country hosted the Asia Cup. The team
beat India and Sri Lanka but failed to keep the reputation in the final game
against Pakistan. However, it was the first time Bangladesh had advanced to the
final of any top-class international cricket tournament. They participated at
the 2010 Asian Games in Guangzhou, defeating Afghanistan to claim their Gold
Medal in the first ever cricket tournament held in the Asian Games. Bangladeshi
cricketer Sakib Al Hasan is no.1 on the ICC's all-rounder rankings in all three
formats of the cricket.

Kabaddi is a very popular game in Bangladesh, considered the national game.
Other popular sports include field hockey, tennis, badminton, handball,
basketball, volleyball, chess, shooting, angling. The National Sports Council
regulates 42 different sporting federations.

Bangladesh has 5 grandmasters in chess. Among them, Niaz Murshed was the first
grandmaster in South Asia. In another achievement, Margarita Mamun, a Russian
rhythmic gymnast of Bangladeshi origin,became world champion in 2013 and 2014.

The Bangladeshi press is diverse, outspoken and privately owned. Over 200
newspapers are published in the country. Bangladesh Betar is the state-run radio
service. The British Broadcasting Corporation operates the popular BBC Bangla
news and current affairs service. Bengali broadcasts from Voice of America are
also very popular. Bangladesh Television (BTV) is the state-owned television
network. There more than 20 privately owned television networks, including
several news channels. Freedom of the media remains a major concern, due to
government attempts at censorship and harassment of journalists.

The cinema of Bangladesh dates back to 1898, when films began screening at the
Crown Theatre in Dacca. The first bioscope in the subcontinent was established
in Dacca that year. The Dhaka Nawab Family patronized the production of several
silent films in the 1920s and 30s. In 1931, the East Bengal Cinematograph
Society released the first full-length feature film in Bangladesh, titled the
Last Kiss. The first feature film in East Pakistan, Mukh O Mukhosh, was released
in 1956. During the 1960s, 25–30 films were produced annually in Dacca. By the
2000s, Bangladesh produced 80–100 films a year. While the Bangladeshi film
industry has achieved limited commercial success; the country has produced
notable independent filmmakers. Zahir Raihan was a prominent documentary-maker
who was assassinated in 1971. The late Tareque Masud is regarded as one of
Bangladesh's outstanding directors due to his numerous productions on historical
and social issues. Masud was honored by FIPRESCI at the Cannes Film Festival in
2002 for his film The Clay Bird. Tanvir Mokammel, Mostofa Sarwar Farooki,
Humayun Ahmed, Alamgir Kabir, Chashi Nazrul Islam are some of the prominent
directors of Bangladeshi cinema.

Cycle rickshaws are the most popular form of public transport in Bangladesh.
Dhaka, the nation's biggest city, is nicknamed the Rickshaw Capital of the
World. Rickshaws also ply the streets of other major cities, as well as the
countryside. Bangladeshi rickshaws are decorated with colorful posters and
boards, often depicting movie stars, national monuments or religious icons.
Rickshaw art is considered a form of neo-romanticism. This unique trend started
in Rajshahi and Dhaka in the 1950s. Each region of Bangladesh has a distinct
style of rickshaw art. For example, rickshaw art in Chittagong and Comilla are
dominated by floral scenery and Arabic texts. Auto-rickshaws are widely seen in
urban centers. Cycle-driven carts are found in many parts of the country.
Bangladeshi rickshaw art has received international fame, and has been called
"people's art".

Rickshaw driving provides employment for many poor Bangladeshis coming from
rural areas.

The Varendra Research Museum is the oldest museum in Bangladesh. It houses
important collections from both the pre-Islamic and Islamic periods, including
the sculptures of the Pala-Sena School of Art and the Indus Valley Civilization;
as well as Sanskrit, Arabic and Persian manuscripts and inscriptions. The Ahsan
Manzil, the former residence of the Nawab of Dhaka, is a national museum housing
collections from the British Raj. It was the site of the founding conference of
the All India Muslim League and hosted many British Viceroys in Dhaka.

The Tajhat Palace Museum preserves artifacts of the rich cultural heritage of
North Bengal, including Hindu-Buddhist sculptures and Islamic manuscripts. The
Mymensingh Museum houses the personal antique collections of Bengali aristocrats
in central Bengal. The Ethnological Museum of Chittagong showcases the lifestyle
of various tribes in Bangladesh. The Bangladesh National Museum is located in
Ramna, Dhaka and has a rich collection of antiquities. The Liberation War Museum
documents the Bangladeshi struggle for independence and the 1971 genocide.

In ancient times, manuscripts were written on palm leaves, tree barks, parchment
vellum and terracotta plates and preserved at monasteries known as viharas. The
Hussain Shahi dynasty established royal libraries during the Bengal Sultanate.
Libraries were established in each district of Bengal by the zamindar gentry
during the Bengal Renaissance in the 19th-century. The trend of establishing
libraries continued until the beginning of World War II. In 1854, four major
public libraries were opened, including the Bogra Woodburn Library, the Rangpur
Public Library, the Jessore Institute Public Library and the Barisal Public
Library.

The Northbrook Hall Public Library was established in Dacca in 1882 in honour of
Lord Northbrook, the Governor General. Other libraries established in the
British period included the Victoria Public Library, Natore (1901), the
Sirajganj Public Library (1882), the Rajshahi Public Library (1884), the Comilla
Birchandra Library (1885), the Shah Makhdum Institute Public Library, Rajshahi
(1891), the Noakhali Town Hall Public Library (1896), the Prize Memorial
Library, Sylhet (1897), the Chittagong Municipality Public Library (1904) and
the Varendra Research Library (1910). The Great Bengal Library Association was
formed in 1925. The Central Public Library of Dhaka was established in 1959. The
National Library of Bangladesh was established in 1972. The World Literature
Center, founded by Ramon Magsaysay Award winner Abdullah Abu Sayeed, is noted
for operating numerous mobile libraries across Bangladesh and was awarded the
UNESCO Jon Amos Comenius Medal.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EnVyUs

Team EnVyUs, known as Team Envy (abbrev. nV) or as "The Boy's in Blue", is an
esports organization based in the United States. It was founded in 2007 as a
competitive Call of Duty team. It is currently managed by Mike "Hastr0" Rufail
and Tyler Thompson. Trevor "TmarTn" Martin additionally holds equity in the
company. Team EnVyUs have teams competing in Call of Duty, Counter-Strike:
Global Offensive, Gears of War, Halo, League of Legends, Overwatch and StarCraft
II.

EnVyUs officially entered the Counter-Strike scene on February 2, 2015 after
acquiring the French squad of Team LDLC.

EnVyUs finished 3rd-4th at ESL One Katowice 2015 after losing to Ninjas in
Pyjamas 0-2 in the semifinals.

On July 21, 2015 EnVyUs sent Richard "shox" Papillon and Edouard "SmithZz"
Dubourdeaux to Titan, while EnVyUs received former Titan players Kenny "kennyS"
Schrub and Dan "apEX" Madesclaire.

EnVyUs finished 2nd at ESL One Cologne 2015 after losing to Fnatic 0-2 in the
finals and won DreamHack Open Cluj-Napoca 2015 after a 2-0 victory over Natus
Vincere.

Team EnVyUs decided to withdraw from the Counter-Strike tournament at Intel
Extreme Masters Season X - San Jose because of flight delays resulting from
security concerns following the November 2015 Paris attacks.

After placing 11-12th at IEM Katowice 2016, EnVyUs announced Timothée "DEVIL"
Démolon from Team LDLC: White, would be replacing Fabien "kioShiMa" Fiey, due to
communication problems.

Team EnVyUs' League of Legends roster was formed on May 18, 2016, after they
bought and acquired the NA LCS seed of Renegades. They are officially named Team
Envy in the NA LCS.

Team EnVyUs' first venture into Halo was officially announced on November 10,
2015. The organization announced the signing of Richie "Heinz" Heinz, Justin
"iGotUrPistola" Deese, Bradley "APG" Laws along with the acquisition of Austin
"Mikwen" McCleary in a player transaction with Team Liquid. On December 15, EnVy
Halo won the first Astro Gaming Spartans $1,000 4v4 online tournament, defeating
Winterfox in the finals. On January 13, APG and Heinz left Team EnVyUs to join
Team Liquid. They were quickly replaced by Scott "Cloud" Holste and Jacob
"Hysteria" Reiser. During the next week, a team change frenzy was sparked by
Lethul leaving Evil Geniuses. This led to Mikwen and Pistola recruiting new free
agent Tom "OGRE2" Ryan, and quickly rounding out the roster with Jacob "Arkanum"
Santos. Cloud and Hysteria would go on to form Triggers Pound. The team would
eventually qualify for the HWC NA Regional Finals 2016 as the #6 seed. At the
tournament, they would go 0-2 in the group stage, first being defeated by Evil
Geniuses and then being upset by Denial eSports. As a result, they would not
qualify for Halo World Championship 2016.

EnVyUs won the MLG Pro League Season 3 in 2014. On July 17, 2016 EnVyUs won the
Call of Duty World League Stage 2 Championship, defeated Dream Team in the
finals 4-1. Team EnVyUs went on to win CoD XP taking down Splyce 3-1 in the
grand final on September 4, 2016.

As of this edit, this article uses content from EnVyUs "Team EnVyUs", which is
licensed in a way that permits reuse under the Creative Commons
Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License, but not under the GFDL. All
relevant terms must be followed.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTTPS

HTTPS (also called HTTP over TLS, HTTP over SSL, and HTTP Secure) is a protocol
for secure communication over a computer network which is widely used on the
Internet. HTTPS consists of communication over Hypertext Transfer Protocol
(HTTP) within a connection encrypted by Transport Layer Security, or its
predecessor, Secure Sockets Layer. The main motivation for HTTPS is
authentication of the visited website and protection of the privacy and
integrity of the exchanged data.

In its popular deployment on the internet, HTTPS provides authentication of the
website and associated web server with which one is communicating, which
protects against man-in-the-middle attacks. Additionally, it provides
bidirectional encryption of communications between a client and server, which
protects against eavesdropping and tampering with or forging the contents of the
communication. In practice, this provides a reasonable guarantee that one is
communicating with precisely the website that one intended to communicate with
(as opposed to an impostor), as well as ensuring that the contents of
communications between the user and site cannot be read or forged by any third
party.

Historically, HTTPS connections were primarily used for payment transactions on
the World Wide Web, e-mail and for sensitive transactions in corporate
information systems. In the late 2000s and early 2010s, HTTPS began to see
widespread use for protecting page authenticity on all types of websites,
securing accounts and keeping user communications, identity and web browsing
private.

The HTTPS uniform resource identifier (URI) scheme has identical syntax to the
standard HTTP scheme, aside from its scheme token. However, HTTPS signals the
browser to use an added encryption layer of SSL/TLS to protect the traffic.
SSL/TLS is especially suited for HTTP, since it can provide some protection even
if only one side of the communication is authenticated. This is the case with
HTTP transactions over the Internet, where typically only the server is
authenticated (by the client examining the server's certificate).

HTTPS creates a secure channel over an insecure network. This ensures reasonable
protection from eavesdroppers and man-in-the-middle attacks, provided that
adequate cipher suites are used and that the server certificate is verified and
trusted.

Because HTTPS piggybacks HTTP entirely on top of TLS, the entirety of the
underlying HTTP protocol can be encrypted. This includes the request URL (which
particular web page was requested), query parameters, headers, and cookies
(which often contain identity information about the user). However, because host
(website) addresses and port numbers are necessarily part of the underlying
TCP/IP protocols, HTTPS cannot protect their disclosure. In practice this means
that even on a correctly configured web server, eavesdroppers can infer the IP
address and port number of the web server (sometimes even the domain name e.g.
www.example.org, but not the rest of the URL) that one is communicating with, as
well as the amount (data transferred) and duration (length of session) of the
communication, though not the content of the communication.

Web browsers know how to trust HTTPS websites based on certificate authorities
that come pre-installed in their software. Certificate authorities (such as
Symantec, Comodo, GoDaddy and GlobalSign) are in this way being trusted by web
browser creators to provide valid certificates. Therefore, a user should trust
an HTTPS connection to a website if and only if all of the following are true:

HTTPS is especially important over insecure networks (such as public Wi-Fi
access points), as anyone on the same local network can packet-sniff and
discover sensitive information not protected by HTTPS. Additionally, many free
to use and even paid for WLAN networks engage in packet injection in order to
serve their own ads on webpages. However, this can be exploited maliciously in
many ways, such as injecting malware onto webpages and stealing users' private
information.

HTTPS is also very important for connections over the Tor anonymity network, as
malicious Tor nodes can damage or alter the contents passing through them in an
insecure fashion and inject malware into the connection. This is one reason why
the Electronic Frontier Foundation and the Tor project started the development
of HTTPS Everywhere, which is included in the Tor Browser Bundle.

As more information is revealed about global mass surveillance and criminals
stealing personal information, the use of HTTPS security on all websites is
becoming increasingly important regardless of the type of Internet connection
being used. While metadata about individual pages that a user visits is not
sensitive, when combined, they can reveal a lot about the user and compromise
the user's privacy.

Deploying HTTPS also allows the use of HTTP/2 (or its predecessor, the
now-deprecated protocol SPDY), that are new generations of HTTP, designed to
reduce page load times and latency.

It is recommended to use HTTP Strict Transport Security (HSTS) with HTTPS to
protect users from man-in-the-middle attacks, especially SSL stripping.

HTTPS should not be confused with the little-used Secure HTTP (S-HTTP) specified
in RFC 2660.

As of June 2016[update], 10.2% of Alexa top 1,000,000 websites use HTTPS as
default, 43.1% of the Internet's 141,387 most popular websites have a secure
implementation of HTTPS, and 45% of page loads (measured by Firefox Telemetry)
use HTTPS.

Most browsers display a warning if they receive an invalid certificate. Older
browsers, when connecting to a site with an invalid certificate, would present
the user with a dialog box asking whether they wanted to continue. Newer
browsers display a warning across the entire window. Newer browsers also
prominently display the site's security information in the address bar. Extended
validation certificates turn the address bar green in newer browsers. Most
browsers also display a warning to the user when visiting a site that contains a
mixture of encrypted and unencrypted content.

Firefox uses HTTPS for Google searches as of version 14, to "shield our users
from network infrastructure that may be gathering data about the users or
modifying/censoring their search results".

The Electronic Frontier Foundation, opining that "In an ideal world, every web
request could be defaulted to HTTPS", has provided an add-on called HTTPS
Everywhere for Mozilla Firefox that enables HTTPS by default for hundreds of
frequently used websites. A beta version of this plugin is also available for
Google Chrome and Chromium.

The security of HTTPS is that of the underlying TLS, which typically uses
long-term public and private keys to generate a short-term session key, which is
then used to encrypt the data flow between client and server. X.509 certificates
are used to authenticate the server (and sometimes the client as well). As a
consequence, certificate authorities and public key certificates are necessary
to verify the relation between the certificate and its owner, as well as to
generate, sign, and administer the validity of certificates. While this can be
more beneficial than verifying the identities via a web of trust, the 2013 mass
surveillance disclosures drew attention to certificate authorities as a
potential weak point allowing man-in-the-middle attacks. An important property
in this context is forward secrecy, which ensures that encrypted communications
recorded in the past cannot be retrieved and decrypted should long-term secret
keys or passwords be compromised in the future. Not all web servers provide
forward secrecy.[needs update]

A site must be completely hosted over HTTPS, without having part of its contents
loaded over HTTP – for example, having scripts loaded insecurely – or the user
will be vulnerable to some attacks and surveillance. Also having only a certain
page that contains sensitive information (such as a log-in page) of a website
loaded over HTTPS, while having the rest of the website loaded over plain HTTP,
will expose the user to attacks. On a site that has sensitive information
somewhere on it, every time that site is accessed with HTTP instead of HTTPS,
the user and the session will get exposed. Similarly, cookies on a site served
through HTTPS have to have the secure attribute enabled.

HTTPS URLs begin with "https://" and use port 443 by default, whereas HTTP URLs
begin with "http://" and use port 80 by default.

HTTP is not encrypted and is vulnerable to man-in-the-middle and eavesdropping
attacks, which can let attackers gain access to website accounts and sensitive
information, and modify webpages to inject malware or advertisements. HTTPS is
designed to withstand such attacks and is considered secure against them (with
the exception of older, deprecated versions of SSL).

HTTP operates at the highest layer of the TCP/IP model, the Application layer;
as does the TLS security protocol (operating as a lower sublayer of the same
layer), which encrypts an HTTP message prior to transmission and decrypts a
message upon arrival. Strictly speaking, HTTPS is not a separate protocol, but
refers to use of ordinary HTTP over an encrypted SSL/TLS connection.

Everything in the HTTPS message is encrypted, including the headers, and the
request/response load. With the exception of the possible CCA cryptographic
attack described in the limitations section below, the attacker can only know
that a connection is taking place between the two parties and their domain names
and IP addresses.

To prepare a web server to accept HTTPS connections, the administrator must
create a public key certificate for the web server. This certificate must be
signed by a trusted certificate authority for the web browser to accept it
without warning. The authority certifies that the certificate holder is the
operator of the web server that presents it. Web browsers are generally
distributed with a list of signing certificates of major certificate authorities
so that they can verify certificates signed by them.

Authoritatively signed certificates may be free or cost between 8 USD and 70 USD
per year (in 2012–2014).

Organizations may also run their own certificate authority, particularly if they
are responsible for setting up browsers to access their own sites (for example,
sites on a company intranet, or major universities). They can easily add copies
of their own signing certificate to the trusted certificates distributed with
the browser.

There also exists a peer-to-peer certificate authority, CACert. However, it is
not included in the trusted root certificates of many popular browsers (e.g.
Firefox, Chrome, Internet Explorer), which may cause warning messages to be
displayed to end users.

Let's Encrypt, launched in April 2016, provides free and automated SSL/TLS
certificates to websites. According to the Electronic Frontier Foundation,
"Let's Encrypt" will make switching from HTTP to HTTPS "as easy as issuing one
command, or clicking one button."

The system can also be used for client authentication in order to limit access
to a web server to authorized users. To do this, the site administrator
typically creates a certificate for each user, a certificate that is loaded into
their browser. Normally, that contains the name and e-mail address of the
authorized user and is automatically checked by the server on each reconnect to
verify the user's identity, potentially without even entering a password.

An important property in this context is perfect forward secrecy (PFS).
Possessing one of the long-term asymmetric secret keys used to establish an
HTTPS session should not make it easier to derive the short-term session key to
then decrypt the conversation, even at a later time. Diffie–Hellman key exchange
(DHE) and Elliptic curve Diffie–Hellman key exchange (ECDHE) are in 2013 the
only ones known to have that property. Only 30% of Firefox, Opera, and Chromium
Browser sessions use it, and nearly 0% of Apple's Safari and Microsoft Internet
Explorer sessions. Among the larger internet providers, only Google supports PFS
since 2011 (State of September 2013).[citation needed]

A certificate may be revoked before it expires, for example because the secrecy
of the private key has been compromised. Newer versions of popular browsers such
as Firefox, Opera, and Internet Explorer on Windows Vista implement the Online
Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) to verify that this is not the case. The
browser sends the certificate's serial number to the certificate authority or
its delegate via OCSP and the authority responds, telling the browser whether
the certificate is still valid.

SSL/TLS comes in two options, simple and mutual. The mutual version is more
secure, but requires the user to install a personal client certificate into
their web browser in order to authenticate themselves.

Whether the strategy is simple or mutual, the level of protection strongly
depends on the correctness of the implementation of the web browser and the
server software and the actual cryptographic algorithms supported.

SSL/TLS does not prevent the entire site from being indexed using a web crawler,
and in some cases the URI of the encrypted resource can be inferred by knowing
only the intercepted request/response size. This allows an attacker to have
access to the plaintext (the publicly available static content), and the
encrypted text (the encrypted version of the static content), permitting a
cryptographic attack.

Because TLS operates below HTTP and has no knowledge of higher-level protocols,
TLS servers can only strictly present one certificate for a particular IP/port
combination. In the past, this meant that it was not feasible to use name-based
virtual hosting with HTTPS. A solution called Server Name Indication (SNI)
exists, which sends the hostname to the server before encrypting the connection,
although many very old browsers do not support this extension. Support for SNI
is available since Firefox 2, Opera 8, Safari 2.1, Google Chrome 6, and Internet
Explorer 7 on Windows Vista.

A sophisticated type of man-in-the-middle attack called SSL stripping was
presented at the Blackhat Conference 2009. This type of attack defeats the
security provided by HTTPS by changing the https: link into an http: link,
taking advantage of the fact that few Internet users actually type "https" into
their browser interface: they get to a secure site by clicking on a link, and
thus are fooled into thinking that they are using HTTPS when in fact they are
using HTTP. The attacker then communicates in clear with the client. This
prompted the development of a countermeasure in HTTP called HTTP Strict
Transport Security.

HTTPS has been shown vulnerable to a range of traffic analysis attacks. Traffic
analysis attacks are a type of side-channel attack that relies on variations in
the timing and size of traffic in order to infer properties about the encrypted
traffic itself. Traffic analysis is possible because SSL/TLS encryption changes
the contents of traffic, but has minimal impact on the size and timing of
traffic. In May 2010, a research paper by researchers from Microsoft Research
and Indiana University discovered that detailed sensitive user data can be
inferred from side channels such as packet sizes. More specifically, the
researchers found that an eavesdropper can infer the
illnesses/medications/surgeries of the user, his/her family income and
investment secrets, despite HTTPS protection in several high-profile,
top-of-the-line web applications in healthcare, taxation, investment and web
search. Although this work demonstrated vulnerability of HTTPS to traffic
analysis, the approach presented by the authors required manual analysis and
focused specifically on web applications protected by HTTPS.

In June 2014, a team of researchers at UC Berkeley and Intel led by Brad Miller
demonstrated a generalized approach to HTTPS traffic analysis based on machine
learning. The researchers demonstrated that the attack applied to a range of
websites, including Mayo Clinic, Planned Parenthood and YouTube. The attack
assumes that the attacker is able to visit the same webpages as the victim to
gather Network traffic which serves as training data. The attacker is then able
to identify similarities in the packet sizes and orderings between the victim
traffic and the training data traffic which frequently allow the attacker to
infer the exact page the victim is visiting. For example, this attack could be
used to determine whether a user browsing the Planned Parenthood website is
looking for information about preventative health screening or an abortion. Note
that the attack can not be used to discover user specific values embedded in a
webpage. For example, many banks offer web interfaces which allow users to view
account balances. While the attacker would be able to discover that the user was
viewing an account balance page, they would be unable to learn the user's exact
account balance or account number.

Netscape Communications created HTTPS in 1994 for its Netscape Navigator web
browser. Originally, HTTPS was used with the SSL protocol. As SSL evolved into
Transport Layer Security (TLS), HTTPS was formally specified by RFC 2818 in May
2000.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Islamic_State_of_Iraq_and_the_Levant

The Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL, IPA /ˈaɪsᵻl/), also known as the
Islamic State of Iraq and Syria[note 1] (ISIS, /ˈaɪsᵻs/), Islamic State (IS),
and by its Arabic language acronym Daesh (Arabic: داعش‎‎ dāʿish,
IPA: [ˈdaːʕɪʃ]), is a Salafi jihadist unrecognised proto-state and militant
group that follows a fundamentalist, Wahhabi doctrine of Sunni Islam. ISIL
gained global notoriety in early 2014 when it drove Iraqi government forces out
of key cities in its Western Iraq offensive, followed by its capture of Mosul
and the Sinjar massacre.

This group has been designated a terrorist organisation by the United Nations
and many individual countries. ISIL is widely known for its videos of beheadings
of both soldiers and civilians, including journalists and aid workers, and its
destruction of cultural heritage sites. The United Nations holds ISIL
responsible for human rights abuses and war crimes, and Amnesty International
has charged the group with ethnic cleansing on a "historic scale" in northern
Iraq.

ISIL originated as Jama'at al-Tawhid wal-Jihad in 1999, which pledged allegiance
to al-Qaeda and participated in the Iraqi insurgency following the 2003 invasion
of Iraq by Western forces. The group proclaimed itself a worldwide caliphate and
began referring to itself as Islamic State (الدولة الإسلامية ad-Dawlah
al-Islāmiyah) or IS in June 2014. As a caliphate, it claims religious,
political, and military authority over all Muslims worldwide. Its adoption of
the name Islamic State and its idea of a caliphate have been widely criticised,
with the United Nations, various governments, and mainstream Muslim groups
rejecting its statehood.

In Syria, the group conducted ground attacks on both government forces and
opposition factions, and by December 2015 it held a large area in western Iraq
and eastern Syria containing an estimated 2.8 to 8 million people, where it
enforced its interpretation of sharia law. ISIL is now believed to be
operational in 18 countries across the world, including Afghanistan and
Pakistan, with "aspiring branches" in Mali, Egypt, Somalia, Bangladesh,
Indonesia, and the Philippines. As of 2015, ISIL is estimated to have an annual
budget of more than USD$1 billion and a force of more than 30,000 fighters.

In April 2013, having expanded into Syria, the group adopted the name ad-Dawlah
al-Islāmiyah fī 'l-ʿIrāq wa-sh-Shām (الدولة الإسلامية في العراق والشام‎). As
al-Shām is a region often compared with the Levant or Greater Syria, the group's
name has been variously translated as "Islamic State of Iraq and al-Sham",
"Islamic State of Iraq and Syria" (both abbreviated as ISIS), or "Islamic State
of Iraq and the Levant" (abbreviated as ISIL).

While the use of either one or the other acronym has been the subject of debate,
the distinction between the two and its relevance has been considered not so
great. Of greater relevance is Daesh, an acronym of ISIL's Arabic name al-Dawlah
al-Islamīyah fī al-ʻIrāq wa-al-Shām. Daesh, or Da'ish (داعش‎), has been widely
used by ISIL's Arabic-speaking detractors,[clarification needed] although – and
to a certain extent because – it is considered derogatory, as it resembles the
Arabic words Daes (lit. "one who crushes, or tramples down, something
underfoot") and Dāhis (loosely translated: "one who sows discord"). Within areas
under its control, ISIL considers use of the acronym Daesh punishable by
flogging or cutting out the tongue.

In late June 2014 the group renamed itself ad-Dawlah al-Islāmiyah (lit. Islamic
State or IS), declaring itself a worldwide caliphate. The name "Islamic State"
and the group's claim to be a caliphate have been widely rejected, with the UN,
various governments, and mainstream Muslim groups refusing to use the new name.

The group's declaration of a new caliphate in June 2014 and its adoption of the
name "Islamic State" have been criticised and ridiculed by Muslim scholars and
rival Islamists both inside and outside the territory it controls. In a speech
in September 2014, President Obama said that ISIL is not "Islamic" on the basis
that no religion condones the killing of innocents and that no government
recognises the group as a state, while many object to using the name "Islamic
State" owing to the far-reaching religious and political claims to authority
which that name implies. The United Nations Security Council, the United States,
Canada, Turkey, Australia, Russia, the United Kingdom and other countries
generally call the group "ISIL", while much of the Arab world uses the Arabic
acronym "Dāʻish". France's Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius said "This is a
terrorist group and not a state. I do not recommend using the term Islamic State
because it blurs the lines between Islam, Muslims, and Islamists. The Arabs call
it 'Daesh' and I will be calling them the 'Daesh cutthroats.'" Retired general
John Allen, the US envoy appointed to co-ordinate the coalition, US military
Lieutenant General James Terry, head of operations against the group, and
Secretary of State John Kerry had all shifted towards use of the term DAESH by
December 2014.

In late August 2014, a leading Islamic educational institution, Dar al-Ifta
al-Misriyyah in Egypt, advised Muslims to stop calling the group "Islamic State"
and instead refer to it as "Al-Qaeda Separatists in Iraq and Syria" or "QSIS",
because of the militant group's "un-Islamic character". When addressing the
United Nations Security Council in September 2014, Australian Prime Minister
Tony Abbott summarised the widespread objections to the name "Islamic State"
thus: "To use this term [Islamic State] is to dignify a death cult; a death cult
that, in declaring itself a caliphate, has declared war on the world". The group
is very sensitive about its name. "They will cut your tongue out even if you
call them ISIS – you have to say 'Islamic State'", said a woman in
ISIL-controlled Mosul.

In mid-October 2014, representatives of the Islamic Society of Britain, the
Association of British Muslims and the UK's Association of Muslim Lawyers
proposed that "'Un-Islamic State' (UIS) could be an accurate and fair
alternative name to describe this group and its agenda", further stating, "We
need to work together and make sure that these fanatics don't get the propaganda
that they feed off." The "Islamic State" is mocked on social media websites such
as Twitter and YouTube, with the use of hashtags, mock recruiting ads, fake news
articles and YouTube videos.

ISIL is a theocracy, proto-state and a Salafi or Wahhabi group. It follows an
extremist interpretation of Islam, promotes religious violence, and regards
Muslims who do not agree with its interpretations as infidels or apostates.
According to Hayder al Khoei, ISIL's philosophy is represented by the symbolism
in the Black Standard variant of the legendary battle flag of Prophet Muhammad
that it has adopted: the flag shows the Seal of Muhammad within a white circle,
with the phrase above it, "There is no god but God". Such symbolism has been
said to point to ISIL's belief that it represents the restoration of the
caliphate of early Islam, with all the political, religious and eschatological
ramifications that this would imply.

According to some observers, ISIL emerged from the ideology of the Muslim
Brotherhood, the first post-Ottoman Islamist group dating back to the late 1920s
in Egypt. It adheres to global jihadist principles and follows the hard-line
ideology of al-Qaeda and many other modern-day jihadist groups. However, other
sources trace the group's roots to Wahhabism.

According to The Economist, dissidents in the ISIL capital of Raqqa report that
"all 12 of the judges who now run its court system ... are Saudis". Saudi
practices also followed by the group include the establishment of religious
police to root out "vice" and enforce attendance at salat prayers, the
widespread use of capital punishment, and the destruction or re-purposing of any
non-Sunni religious buildings. Bernard Haykel has described al-Baghdadi's creed
as "a kind of untamed Wahhabism".

ISIL aims to return to the early days of Islam, rejecting all innovations in the
religion, which it believes corrupts its original spirit. It condemns later
caliphates and the Ottoman Empire for deviating from what it calls pure Islam,
and seeks to revive the original Wahhabi project of the restoration of the
caliphate governed by strict Salafist doctrine. Following Salafi-Wahhabi
tradition, ISIL condemns the followers of secular law as disbelievers, putting
the current Saudi Arabian government in that category.

Salafists such as ISIL believe that only a legitimate authority can undertake
the leadership of jihad, and that the first priority over other areas of combat,
such as fighting non-Muslim countries, is the purification of Islamic society.
For example, ISIL regards the Palestinian Sunni group Hamas as apostates who
have no legitimate authority to lead jihad and see fighting Hamas as the first
step toward confrontation by ISIL with Israel.

One difference between ISIL and other Islamist and jihadist movements, including
al-Qaeda, is the group's emphasis on eschatology and apocalypticism – that is, a
belief in a final Day of Judgment by God, and specifically, a belief that the
arrival of one known as Imam Mahdi is near. ISIL believes that it will defeat
the army of "Rome" at the town of Dabiq, in fulfilment of prophecy. Following
its interpretation of the Hadith of the Twelve Successors, ISIL also believes
that after al-Baghdadi there will be only four more legitimate caliphs.

Since at least 2004, a significant goal of the group has been the foundation of
a Sunni Islamic state. Specifically, ISIL has sought to establish itself as a
caliphate, an Islamic state led by a group of religious authorities under a
supreme leader – the caliph – who is believed to be the successor to Prophet
Muhammad. In June 2014, ISIL published a document in which it claimed to have
traced the lineage of its leader al-Baghdadi back to Muhammad, and upon
proclaiming a new caliphate on 29 June, the group appointed al-Baghdadi as its
caliph. As caliph, he demands the allegiance of all devout Muslims worldwide,
according to Islamic jurisprudence (fiqh).

ISIL has detailed its goals in its Dabiq magazine, saying it will continue to
seize land and take over the entire Earth until its:

According to German journalist Jürgen Todenhöfer, who spent ten days embedded
with ISIL in Mosul, the view he kept hearing was that ISIL wants to "conquer the
world", and that all who do not believe in the group's interpretation of the
Quran will be killed. Todenhöfer was struck by the ISIL fighters' belief that
"all religions who agree with democracy have to die", and by their "incredible
enthusiasm" – including enthusiasm for killing "hundreds of millions" of people.

When the caliphate was proclaimed, ISIL stated: "The legality of all emirates,
groups, states and organisations becomes null by the expansion of the khilafah's
[caliphate's] authority and arrival of its troops to their areas." This was a
rejection of the political divisions in Southwestern Asia that were established
by the UK and France during World War I in the Sykes–Picot Agreement.

All non-Muslim areas would be targeted for conquest after the Muslim "lands"
were dealt with, according to the Islamist manual Management of Savagery.

Documents found after the death of Samir Abd Muhammad al-Khlifawi, a former
colonel in the intelligence service of the Iraqi Air Force before the US
invasion who had been described as "the strategic head" of ISIL, detailed
planning for the ISIL takeover of northern Syria which made possible "the
group's later advances into Iraq". Al-Khlifawi called for the infiltration of
areas to be conquered with spies who would find out "as much as possible about
the target towns: Who lived there, who was in charge, which families were
religious, which Islamic school of religious jurisprudence they belonged to, how
many mosques there were, who the imam was, how many wives and children he had
and how old they were". Following this surveillance and espionage would come
murder and kidnapping – "the elimination of every person who might have been a
potential leader or opponent". In Raqqa, after rebel forces drove out the Assad
regime and ISIL infiltrated the town, "first dozens and then hundreds of people
disappeared".

Security and intelligence expert Martin Reardon has described ISIL's purpose as
being to psychologically "break" those under its control, "[...] so as to ensure
their absolute allegiance through fear and intimidation," while generating,
"[...]outright hate and vengeance" among its enemies. Jason Burke, a journalist
writing on Salafi jihadism, has written that ISIL's goal is to "terrorize,
mobilize [and] polarize". Its efforts to terrorise are intended to intimidate
civilian populations and force governments of the target enemy "to make rash
decisions that they otherwise would not choose". It aims to mobilise its
supporters by motivating them with, for example, spectacular deadly attacks deep
in Western territory (such as the November 2015 Paris attacks), to polarise by
driving Muslim populations – particularly in the West – away from their
governments, thus increasing the appeal of ISIL's self-proclaimed caliphate
among them, and to: "Eliminate neutral parties through either absorption or
elimination". Journalist Rukmini Maria Callimachi also emphasises ISIL's
interest in polarization or in eliminating what it calls the "grey zone" between
the black (non-Muslims) and white (ISIL). "The gray is moderate Muslims who are
living in the West and are happy and feel engaged in the society here."

A work published online in 2004 entitled Management of Savagery (Idarat at
Tawahoush), described by several media outlets as influential on ISIL and
intended to provide a strategy to create a new Islamic caliphate, recommended a
strategy of attack outside its territory in which fighters would, "Diversify and
widen the vexation strikes against the Crusader-Zionist enemy in every place in
the Islamic world, and even outside of it if possible, so as to disperse the
efforts of the alliance of the enemy and thus drain it to the greatest extent
possible."

Raqqa in Syria has been under ISIL control since 2013 and in 2014 it became the
group's de facto capital city.

ISIL is headed and run by Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi. Before their deaths, he had two
deputy leaders, Abu Muslim al-Turkmani for Iraq and Abu Ali al-Anbari (also
known as Abu Ala al-Afri) for Syria, both ethnic Turkmen. Advising al-Baghdadi
is a cabinet of senior leaders, while its operations in Iraq and Syria are
controlled by local governors. Beneath the leaders are councils on finance,
leadership, military matters, legal matters (including decisions on executions)
foreign fighters' assistance, security, intelligence and media. In addition, a
shura council has the task of ensuring that all decisions made by the governors
and councils comply with the group's interpretation of sharia. While al-Baghdadi
has told followers to "advise me when I err" in sermons, according to observers
"any threat, opposition, or even contradiction is instantly eradicated".

According to Iraqis, Syrians and analysts who study the group, almost all of
ISIL's leaders—including the members of its military and security committees and
the majority of its emirs and princes—are former Iraqi military and intelligence
officers, specifically former members of Saddam Hussein's Ba'ath government who
lost their jobs and pensions in the de-Ba'athification process after that regime
was overthrown. The former Chief Strategist in the Office of the Coordinator for
Counterterrorism of the US State Department, David Kilcullen, has said that
"There undeniably would be no Isis if we had not invaded Iraq." It has been
reported that Iraqis and Syrians have been given greater precedence over other
nationalities within ISIL because the group needs the loyalties of the local
Sunni populations in both Syria and Iraq in order to be sustainable. Other
reports, however, have indicated that Syrians are at a disadvantage to foreign
members, with some native Syrian fighters resenting "favouritism" allegedly
shown towards foreigners over pay and accommodation.

In August 2016, media reports based on briefings by Western intelligence
agencies suggested that ISIL had a multilevel secret service known in Arabic as
Emni, established in 2014, that has become a combination of an internal police
force and an external operations directorate complete with regional branches.
The unit was believed to be under the overall command of ISIL's most senior
Syrian operative, spokesman and propaganda chief Abu Mohammad al-Adnani until
his death by airstrike in late August 2016.

In 2014 The Wall Street Journal estimated that eight million people lived in the
Islamic State. The United Nations Commission on Human Rights has stated that
ISIL "seeks to subjugate civilians under its control and dominate every aspect
of their lives through terror, indoctrination, and the provision of services to
those who obey". Civilians, as well as the Islamic State itself, have released
footage of some of the human rights abuses.

Social control of civilians is by imposition of ISIL's reading of sharia law,
enforced by morality police forces known as Al-Hisbah and the all-women
Al-Khanssaa Brigade, a general police force, courts, and other entities managing
recruitment, tribal relations, and education. Al-Hisbah is led by Abu Muhammad
al-Jazrawi.

Estimates of the size of ISIL's military vary widely, from tens of thousands up
to 200,000. In early 2015, journalist Mary Anne Weaver estimated that half of
ISIL fighters are foreigners. A UN report estimated a total of 15,000 fighters
from over 80 countries were in ISIL's ranks in November 2014. US intelligence
estimated an increase to around 20,000 foreign fighters in February 2015,
including 3,400 from the Western world. In September 2015, the CIA estimated
that 30,000 foreign fighters had joined ISIL.

According to Abu Hajjar, a former senior leader of ISIL, foreign fighters
receive food, petrol and housing, but unlike native Iraqi or Syrian fighters,
they do not receive payment in wages.

ISIL relies mostly on captured weapons with major sources including Saddam
Hussein's Iraqi stockpiles from the 2003–11 Iraq insurgency and weapons from
government and opposition forces fighting in the Syrian Civil War and during the
post-US withdrawal Iraqi insurgency. The captured weapons, including armour,
guns, surface-to-air missiles, and even some aircraft, enabled rapid territorial
growth and facilitated the capture of additional equipment. For example, ISIL
captured US-made TOW anti-tank missiles supplied by the United States and Saudi
Arabia to the Free Syrian Army in Syria.

The group uses truck and car bombs, suicide bombers and IEDs, and has used
chemical weapons in Iraq and Syria. ISIL captured nuclear materials from Mosul
University in July 2014, but is unlikely to be able to convert them into
weapons. In September 2015 a US official stated that ISIL was manufacturing and
using mustard agent in Syria and Iraq, and had an active chemical weapons
research team. ISIL has also used water as a weapon of war. The group closed the
gates of the smaller Nuaimiyah dam in Fallujah in April 2014, flooding the
surrounding regions, while cutting the water supply to the Shia-dominated south.
Around 12,000 families lost their homes and 200 km² of villages and fields were
either flooded or dried up. The economy of the region also suffered with
destruction of cropland and electricity shortages.

During the Battle of Mosul it was reported that commercially available
quadcopters and drones were being used by ISIL as surveillance and weapons
delivery platforms using extemporised cradles to drop grenades and other
explosives. The ISIL drone facility became a target of Royal Air Force strike
aircraft.

Although ISIL attracts followers from different parts of the world by promoting
the image of holy war, not all of its recruits end up in combatant roles. There
have been several cases of new recruits expecting to be mujahideen who have
returned from Syria disappointed by the everyday jobs that were assigned to
them, such as drawing water or cleaning toilets, or by the ban imposed on use of
mobile phones during military training sessions.

ISIL publishes material directed at women. Although women are not allowed to
take up arms, media groups encourage them to play supportive roles within ISIL,
such as providing first aid, cooking, nursing and sewing skills, in order to
become "good wives of jihad". In a document entitled Women in the Islamic State:
Manifesto and Case Study released by the media wing of ISIL's all-female
Al-Khanssaa Brigade, emphasis is given to the paramount importance of marriage
and motherhood (as early as nine years old). Women should live a life of
"sedentariness", fulfilling her "divine duty of motherhood" at home, with a few
exceptions like teachers and doctors. Equality for women is opposed, as is
education on non-religious subjects, the "worthless worldly sciences".

ISIL is known for its extensive and effective use of propaganda. It uses a
version of the Muslim Black Standard flag and developed an emblem which has
clear symbolic meaning in the Muslim world.

In November 2006, shortly after the group's rebranding as the "Islamic State of
Iraq", it established the Al-Furqan Foundation for Media Production, which
produces CDs, DVDs, posters, pamphlets, and web-related propaganda products and
official statements. It began to expand its media presence in 2013, with the
formation of a second media wing, Al-I'tisam Media Foundation, in March and the
Ajnad Foundation for Media Production, specialising in nasheeds and audio
content, in August. In mid-2014, ISIL established the Al-Hayat Media Center,
which targets Western audiences and produces material in English, German,
Russian and French. When ISIL announced its expansion to other countries in
November 2014 it established media departments for the new branches, and its
media apparatus ensured that the new branches follow the same models it uses in
Iraq and Syria. FBI Director James Comey has said that ISIL's "propaganda is
unusually slick," noting that, "They are broadcasting... in something like 23
languages".

In July 2014, al-Hayat began publishing a digital magazine called Dabiq, in a
number of different languages including English. According to the magazine, its
name is taken from the town of Dabiq in northern Syria, which is mentioned in a
hadith about Armageddon. Al-Hayat also began publishing other digital magazines,
including the Turkish language Konstantiniyye, the Ottoman word for Istanbul,
and the French language Dar al-Islam. By late 2016, these magazines had
apparently all been discontinued, with Al-Hayat's material being consolidated
into a new magazine called Rumiyah (Arabic for Rome).

The group also runs a radio network called Al-Bayan, which airs bulletins in
Arabic, Russian and English and provides coverage of its activities in Iraq,
Syria and Libya.

ISIL's use of social media has been described by one expert as "probably more
sophisticated than [that of] most US companies". It regularly uses social media,
particularly Twitter, to distribute its messages. The group uses the encrypted
instant messaging service Telegram to disseminate images, videos and updates.

The group is known for releasing videos and photographs of executions of
prisoners, whether beheadings, shootings, caged prisoners being burnt alive or
submerged gradually until drowned. Journalist Abdel Bari Atwan described ISIL's
media content as part of a "systematically applied policy". The escalating
violence of its killings "guarantees" the attention of the media and public.

Along with images of brutality, ISIL presents itself as "an emotionally
attractive place where people 'belong', where everyone is a 'brother' or
'sister'". The "most potent psychological pitch" of ISIL media is the promise of
heavenly reward to dead jihadist fighters. Frequently posted in their media are
dead jihadists' smiling faces, the ISIL 'salute' of a 'right-hand index finger
pointing heavenward', and testimonies of happy widows. ISIL has also attempted
to present a more "rational argument" in a series of videos hosted by the
kidnapped journalist John Cantlie. In one video, various current and former US
officials were quoted, such as US President Barack Obama and former CIA Officer
Michael Scheuer.

According to a 2015 study by the Financial Action Task Force, ISIL's five
primary sources of revenue are as followed (listed in order of significance):

Since 2012, ISIL has produced annual reports giving numerical information on its
operations, somewhat in the style of corporate reports, seemingly in a bid to
encourage potential donors.

In 2014, the RAND Corporation analysed ISIL's funding sources from documents
captured between 2005 and 2010. It found that outside donations amounted to only
5% of the group's operating budgets, and that cells inside Iraq were required to
send up to 20% of the income generated from kidnapping, extortion rackets and
other activities to the next level of the group's leadership, which would then
redistribute the funds to provincial or local cells that were in difficulties or
needed money to conduct attacks. In 2016, RAND estimated that ISIL finances from
its largest source of income — oil revenues and the taxes it extracts from
people under its control — had fallen from about $1.9 billion in 2014 to $870
million.

In mid-2014, the Iraqi National Intelligence Service obtained information that
ISIL had assets worth US$2 billion, making it the richest jihadist group in the
world. About three-quarters of this sum was said to looted from Mosul's central
bank and commercial banks in the city. However, doubt was later cast on whether
ISIL was able to retrieve anywhere near that sum from the central bank, and even
on whether the looting had actually occurred.

ISIL mints its own gold, silver, and copper coins, based on the coinage used by
the Umayyad Caliphate in the 7th century. It believes paper money is or will be
"worthless". (Economists believe this use of gold will present problems as users
will want to hoard rather than spend gold coins and will use paper currency
instead.)

The group has had various names since it was founded in 1999 by Jordanian
radical Abu Musab al-Zarqawi under the name Jamāʻat al-Tawḥīd wa-al-Jihād
(lit. "The Organisation of Monotheism and Jihad"). When in October 2004
al-Zarqawi swore loyalty to Osama bin Laden, he renamed the group Tanẓīm Qāʻidat
al-Jihād fī Bilād al-Rāfidayn (lit. "The Organisation of Jihad's Base in
Mesopotamia"), commonly known as al-Qaeda in Iraq or AQI. Although the group
never called itself al-Qaeda in Iraq, this remained its informal name for many
years.

In January 2006, AQI merged with several other Sunni insurgent groups to form
the Mujahideen Shura Council (MSC). After al-Zarqawi was killed in June 2006,
the MSC merged in October 2006 with several more insurgent factions to form a
new group, ad-Dawlah al-ʻIraq al-Islāmiyah, which translates as the Islamic
State of Iraq (ISI). The ISI was led by Abu Omar al-Baghdadi and Abu Ayyub
al-Masri, who were killed in a US–Iraqi operation in April 2010, after which Abu
Bakr al-Baghdadi became the group's new leader.

Jordanian radical Abu Musab al-Zarqawi founded Jamāʻat al-Tawḥīd wa-al-Jihād
(lit. "The Organisation of Monotheism and Jihad") in 1999. In October 2004,
al-Zarqawi pledged allegiance (bay'ah) to al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden and
renamed the group Tanẓīm Qāʻidat al-Jihād fī Bilād al-Rāfidayn (lit. "The
Organisation of Jihad's Base in Mesopotamia"), commonly known as al-Qaeda in
Iraq or AQI. Under al-Zarqawi, the group participated in the Iraqi insurgency
following the March 2003 invasion of Iraq by Western forces. In January 2006,
the group joined other Sunni insurgent groups to form the short-lived Mujahideen
Shura Council.

After al-Zarqawi was killed in June 2006, the Mujahideen Shura Council merged in
October 2006 with several more insurgent factions to establish ad-Dawlah
al-ʻIrāq al-Islāmiyah, also known as the Islamic State of Iraq (ISI). The ISI
was led by Abu Omar al-Baghdadi and Abu Ayyub al-Masri, until they were killed
in a US–Iraqi operation in April 2010, after which Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi became
the group's leader.

In August 2011, following the outbreak of the Syrian Civil War, ISI, under the
leadership of al-Baghdadi, sent a mission into Syria. Under the name Jabhat
an-Nuṣrah li-Ahli ash-Shām (or al-Nusra Front), it established a large presence
in Sunni-majority Raqqa, Idlib, Deir ez-Zor, and Aleppo provinces. In April
2013, al-Baghdadi decreed the reunification of the Syrian al-Nusra Front with
ISI to form the "Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" (ISIL). However, Abu
Mohammad al-Julani and Ayman al-Zawahiri, the leaders of al-Nusra and al-Qaeda
respectively, rejected the merger. After an eight-month power struggle, al-Qaeda
cut all ties with ISIL by February 2014, citing its failure to consult and
"notorious intransigence".

In early 2014, ISIL drove Iraqi government forces out of key cities in its Anbar
campaign, which was followed by the capture of Mosul and the Sinjar massacre.
The loss of control almost caused a collapse of the Iraqi government and
prompted a renewal of US military action in Iraq. In Syria, the group has
conducted ground attacks on both the Syrian Arab Army and rebel factions.

Following the 2003 invasion of Iraq, the Jordanian Salafi jihadist Abu Musab
al-Zarqawi and his militant group Jama'at al-Tawhid wal-Jihad, founded in 1999,
achieved notoriety in the early stages of the Iraqi insurgency for their suicide
attacks on Shia mosques, civilians, Iraqi government institutions and Italian
soldiers partaking in the US-led 'Multi-National Force'. Al-Zarqawi's group
officially pledged allegiance to Osama bin Laden's al-Qaeda network in October
2004, changing its name to Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn (تنظيم
قاعدة الجهاد في بلاد الرافدين, "Organisation of Jihad's Base in Mesopotamia"),
also known as al-Qaeda in Iraq (AQI). Attacks by the group on civilians, Iraqi
government forces, foreign diplomats and soldiers, and American convoys
continued with roughly the same intensity. In a letter to al-Zarqawi in July
2005, al-Qaeda's then deputy leader Ayman al-Zawahiri outlined a four-stage plan
to expand the Iraq War. The plan included expelling US forces from Iraq,
establishing an Islamic authority as a caliphate, spreading the conflict to
Iraq's secular neighbours, and clashing with Israel, which the letter said,
"[...] was established only to challenge any new Islamic entity".

In January 2006, AQI joined with several smaller Iraqi insurgent groups under an
umbrella organisation called the Mujahideen Shura Council (MSC). According to
counterterrorism researcher Brian Fishman, the merger was an attempt to give the
group a more Iraqi flavour, and perhaps to distance al-Qaeda from some of
al-Zarqawi's tactical errors, such as the 2005 bombings by AQI of three hotels
in Amman. On 7 June 2006, a US airstrike killed al-Zarqawi, who was succeeded as
leader of the group by the Egyptian militant Abu Ayyub al-Masri.

On 12 October 2006, the Mujahideen Shura Council united with three smaller
groups and six Sunni tribes to form the "Mutayibeen Coalition". It pledged "To
rid Sunnis from the oppression of the rejectionists (Shi'ite Muslims) and the
crusader occupiers ... to restore rights even at the price of our own lives ...
to make Allah's word supreme in the world, and to restore the glory of Islam". A
day later, the Mujahideen Shura Council declared the establishment of the
Islamic State of Iraq (ISI), comprising Iraq's six mostly Sunni Arab
governorates. Abu Omar al-Baghdadi was announced as its emir, and al-Masri was
given the title of Minister of War within the ISI's ten-member cabinet.

According to a study compiled by United States intelligence agencies in early
2007, the ISI planned to seize power in the central and western areas of Iraq
and turn it into a Sunni caliphate. The group built in strength and at its
height enjoyed a significant presence in the Iraqi governorates of Al Anbar,
Diyala and Baghdad, claiming Baqubah as a capital city.

The Iraq War troop surge of 2007 supplied the United States military with more
manpower for operations, resulting in dozens of high-level AQI members being
captured or killed. Between July and October 2007, al-Qaeda in Iraq was reported
to have lost its secure military bases in Al Anbar province and the Baghdad
area. During 2008, a series of US and Iraqi offensives managed to drive out
AQI-aligned insurgents from their former safe havens, such as the Diyala and Al
Anbar governorates, to the area of the northern city of Mosul.

By 2008, the ISI was describing itself as being in a state of "extraordinary
crisis". Its violent attempts to govern territory led to a backlash from Sunni
Arab Iraqis and other insurgent groups and a temporary decline in the group,
which was attributable to a number of factors, notably the Anbar Awakening.

In late 2009, the commander of US forces in Iraq, General Ray Odierno, stated
that the ISI "has transformed significantly in the last two years. What once was
dominated by foreign individuals has now become more and more dominated by Iraqi
citizens". On 18 April 2010, the ISI's two top leaders, Abu Ayyub al-Masri and
Abu Omar al-Baghdadi, were killed in a joint US-Iraqi raid near Tikrit. In a
press conference in June 2010, General Odierno reported that 80% of the ISI's
top 42 leaders, including recruiters and financiers, had been killed or
captured, with only eight remaining at large. He said that they had been cut off
from al-Qaeda's leadership in Pakistan.

On 16 May 2010, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi was appointed the new leader of the Islamic
State of Iraq. Al-Baghdadi replenished the group's leadership, many of whom had
been killed or captured, by appointing former Iraqi military and Intelligence
Service officers who had served during Saddam Hussein's rule. These men, nearly
all of whom had spent time imprisoned by the US military at Camp Bucca, came to
make up about one third of Baghdadi's top 25 commanders, including Abu
Abdulrahman al-Bilawi, Abu Ayman al-Iraqi, and Abu Muslim al-Turkmani. One of
them, a former colonel called Samir al-Khlifawi, also known as Haji Bakr, became
the overall military commander in charge of overseeing the group's operations.
Al-Khlifawi was instrumental in doing the ground work that led to the growth of
ISIL.

In July 2012, al-Baghdadi released an audio statement online announcing that the
group was returning to former strongholds from which US troops and the Sons of
Iraq had driven them in 2007 and 2008. He declared the start of a new offensive
in Iraq called Breaking the Walls, aimed at freeing members of the group held in
Iraqi prisons. Violence in Iraq had begun to escalate in June 2012, primarily
with AQI's car bomb attacks, and by July 2013, monthly fatalities exceeded 1,000
for the first time since April 2008.

In March 2011, protests began in Syria against the Syrian government of Bashar
al-Assad. In the following months, violence between demonstrators and security
forces led to a gradual militarisation of the conflict. In August, al-Baghdadi
began sending Syrian and Iraqi ISI members experienced in guerilla warfare
across the border into Syria to establish an organisation there. Led by a Syrian
known as Abu Muhammad al-Julani, this group began to recruit fighters and
establish cells throughout the country. In January 2012, the group announced its
formation as Jabhat al-Nusra li Ahl as-Sham – Jabhat al-Nusra – more commonly
known as the al-Nusra Front. Al-Nusra grew rapidly into a capable fighting
force, with popular support among Syrians opposed to the Assad government.

On 8 April 2013, al-Baghdadi released an audio statement in which he announced
that the al-Nusra Front had been established, financed, and supported by the
Islamic State of Iraq, and that the two groups were merging under the name
"Islamic State of Iraq and Al-Sham". Al-Julani issued a statement denying the
merger, and complaining that neither he nor anyone else in al-Nusra's leadership
had been consulted about it. In June 2013, Al Jazeera reported that it had
obtained a letter written by al-Qaeda's leader Ayman al-Zawahiri, addressed to
both leaders, in which he ruled against the merger, and appointed an emissary to
oversee relations between them to put an end to tensions. That same month,
al-Baghdadi released an audio message rejecting al-Zawahiri's ruling and
declaring that the merger was going ahead.

Meanwhile, the ISIL campaign to free its imprisoned members culminated in
simultaneous raids on Taji and Abu Ghraib prisons in July 2013, freeing more
than 500 prisoners, many of them veterans of the Iraqi insurgency. In October
2013, al-Zawahiri ordered the disbanding of ISIL, putting al-Nusra Front in
charge of jihadist efforts in Syria, but al-Baghdadi rejected al-Zawahiri's
order, and his group continued to operate in Syria. In February 2014, after an
eight-month power struggle, al-Qaeda publicly disavowed any relations with ISIL.

According to journalist Sarah Birke, there are "significant differences" between
al-Nusra Front and ISIL. While al-Nusra actively calls for the overthrow of the
Assad government, ISIL "tends to be more focused on establishing its own rule on
conquered territory". ISIL is "far more ruthless" in building an Islamic state,
"carrying out sectarian attacks and imposing sharia law immediately". While
al-Nusra has a "large contingent of foreign fighters", it is seen as a
home-grown group by many Syrians; by contrast, ISIL fighters have been described
as "foreign 'occupiers'" by many Syrian refugees. Foreign fighters in Syria
include Russian-speaking jihadists who were part of Jaish al-Muhajireen
wal-Ansar (JMA). In November 2013, Abu Omar al-Shishani, leader of the Jaish
al-Muhajireen wal-Ansar (JMA), swore an oath of allegiance to al-Baghdadi; the
group then split between those who followed al-Shishani in joining ISIL and
those who continued to operate independently in the JMA under new leadership.

In January 2014, rebels affiliated with the Islamic Front and the US-trained
Free Syrian Army launched an offensive against ISIL militants in and around the
city of Aleppo, following months of tensions over ISIL's behavior, which
included the seizure of property and weapons from rebel groups, and the arrests
and killings of activists. Months of clashes ensued, causing thousands of
casualties, with ISIL withdrawing its forces from Idlib and Latakia provinces
and redeploying them to reinforce its strongholds in Raqqa and Aleppo. It also
launched an offensive against all other opposition forces active in the in the
eastern province of Deir ez-Zor, on the border with Iraq. By June 2014, ISIL had
largely defeated its rivals in the province, with many who had not been killed
or driven away pledging allegiance to it.

In Iraq, ISIL was able to capture most of Fallujah in January 2014, and in June
2014 was able to seize control of Mosul.

On 29 June 2014, the organisation proclaimed itself to be a worldwide caliphate.
Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi – known by his supporters as Amir al-Mu'minin, Caliph
Ibrahim – was named its caliph, and the group renamed itself ad-Dawlah
al-Islāmiyah (الدولة الإسلامية, "Islamic State" (IS)). As a "Caliphate", it
claims religious, political and military authority over all Muslims worldwide.
The concept of it being a caliphate and the name "Islamic State" have been
rejected by governments and Muslim leaders worldwide.

In June and July 2014, Jordan and Saudi Arabia moved troops to their borders
with Iraq, after the Iraqi government lost control of (or withdrew from)
strategic crossing points that then came under the control of either ISIL or
tribes that supported it. There was speculation that Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri
al-Maliki had ordered a withdrawal of troops from the Iraq–Saudi crossings in
order "to increase pressure on Saudi Arabia and bring the threat of ISIS
over-running its borders as well".

In July 2014, ISIL recruited more than 6,300 fighters, according to the Syrian
Observatory for Human Rights, some of whom were thought to have previously
fought for the Free Syrian Army. On 23 July 2014, Abu Sayyaf leader Isnilon
Totoni Hapilon and some masked men swore loyalty to al-Baghdadi in a video,
giving ISIL a presence in the Philippines. In September 2014, the group began
kidnapping people for ransom.

On 3 August 2014, ISIL captured the cities of Zumar, Sinjar, and Wana in
northern Iraq. Thousands of Yazidis fled up Mount Sinjar, fearful of the
approaching hostile ISIL militants. The stranded Yazidis' need for food and
water, the threat of genocide to them and to others announced by ISIL, along
with the desire to protect US citizens in Iraq and support the Iraqi government
in its fight against ISIL, were all reasons given for the 2014 American
intervention in Iraq, which began on 7 August. A US aerial bombing campaign
began the following day.

At the end of October 2014, 800 militants gained partial control of the Libyan
city of Derna and pledged their allegiance to Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, thus making
Derna the first city outside Syria and Iraq to be a part of the "Islamic State
Caliphate". On 10 November 2014, a major faction of the Egyptian militant group
Ansar Bait al-Maqdis also pledged its allegiance to ISIL. In mid-January 2015, a
Yemeni official said that ISIL had "dozens" of members in Yemen, and that they
were coming into direct competition with al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula
because of their recruitment drive. The same month, Afghan officials confirmed
that ISIL had a military presence in Afghanistan. However, by February 2015, 65
of the militants were either captured or killed by the Taliban, and ISIL's top
Afghan recruiter, Mullah Abdul Rauf, was killed in a US drone strike.

In early February 2015, ISIL militants in Libya managed to capture part of the
countryside to the west of Sabha, and later, an area encompassing the cities of
Sirte, Nofolia, and a military base to the south of both cities. By March, ISIL
had captured additional territory, including a city to the west of Derna,
additional areas near Sirte, a stretch of land in southern Libya, some areas
around Benghazi, and an area to the east of Tripoli.

On 7 March 2015, Boko Haram swore formal allegiance to ISIL, giving ISIL an
official presence in Nigeria, Niger, Chad and Cameroon. On 13 March 2015, a
group of militants from the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan swore allegiance to
ISIL; the group released another video on 31 July 2015 showing its spiritual
leader also pledging allegiance. In June 2015, the US Deputy Secretary of State
announced that ISIL had lost more than 10,000 members in airstrikes over the
preceding nine months.

In 2015 and 2016, ISIL claimed responsibility for a number of high-profile
terrorist attacks outside Iraq and Syria, including a mass shooting at a
Tunisian tourist resort (38 European tourists killed), the Suruç bombing in
Turkey (33 leftist and pro-Kurdish activists killed), the Tunisian National
Museum attack (24 foreign tourists and Tunisians killed), the Sana'a mosque
bombings (142 Shia civilians killed), the crash of Metrojet Flight 9268 (224
killed, mostly Russian tourists), the bombings in Ankara (102 pro-Kurdish and
leftist activists killed), the bombings in Beirut (43 Shia civilians killed),
the November 2015 Paris attacks (130 civilians killed), the killing of Jaafar
Mohammed Saad, the governor of Aden, the January 2016 Istanbul bombing (11
foreign tourists killed), the 2016 Brussels bombings (over 30 civilians killed),
the 2016 Nice attack (84 civilians killed), the July 2016 Kabul bombing (at
least 80 civilians killed, mostly Shia Hazaras), the 2016 Berlin attack (12
civilians killed) and the 2017 Istanbul nightclub shooting (39 foreigners and
Turks killed).

On 30 August 2016, a survey conducted by the Associated Press found that around
72 mass graves have been discovered in areas that have been liberated from ISIL
control. In total, these mass graves contain the bodies of approximately 15,000
people killed by ISIL. The report stated that the mass graves were evidence of
genocides conducted by ISIL in the region, including the genocide of Yazidis.
Seventeen graves were discovered in Syria, with the rest being found in Iraq. At
least 16 of the graves in Iraq contained remains that were not counted, as they
are located in dangerous conflict zones. Instead, the number of dead in these
graves has been estimated.

As a self-proclaimed worldwide caliphate, ISIL claims religious, political and
military authority over all Muslims worldwide, and that "the legality of all
emirates, groups, states, and organisations, becomes null by the expansion of
the khilāfah's [caliphate's] authority and arrival of its troops to their
areas". Outside Iraq and Syria, it controls territory only in Sinai,
Afghanistan, and Libya.

Since December 2013, ongoing clashes have occurred throughout western Iraq
between tribal militias, Iraqi security forces, and ISIL. In early January 2014,
ISIL militants successfully captured the cities of Fallujah and Hīt, bringing
much of Anbar Province under their control. In June 2014 ISIL took over the
Iraqi city of Mosul. By December 2015, the Islamic State covered a vast
landlocked territory in western Iraq and eastern Syria, with a population
estimate of 2.8 to 8 million people.

In Iraq and Syria, ISIL uses many of those countries' existing governorate
boundaries to subdivide its claimed territory; it calls these divisions wilayah
or provinces. By June 2015, it had established official "provinces" in Libya,
Egypt (Sinai Peninsula), Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Algeria, Afghanistan, Pakistan,
Nigeria and the North Caucasus. Since then, ISIL has continued to receive
pledges of allegiance and publish media releases from groups in countries like
Somalia, Bangladesh and the Philippines, but it has not announced any further
official branches, instead identifying new affiliates as simply "soldiers of the
caliphate".

ISIL organises its Libyan branch using the country's three historical regions,
Cyrenaica in the east, Fezzan in the desert south, and Tripolitania in the west.
They have been the most active and successful of all ISIL branches outside Iraq
and Syria. It has been active particularly around Derna, and Gaddafi's hometown
Sirte. The group grew quickly following the allegiance of militant groups like
the Shura Council of Islamic Youth.

ISIL temporarily controlled part of Derna before being driven out in mid-2015 by
a rival militant Islamist group, with support from the Libyan Air Force. Libya’s
Interim Government launched a major offensive against ISIL territory around
Sirte in May 2016, capturing the city by December 2016. The Libyan National
Army, led by Commander General Khalifa Haftar, has also clashed with ISIL,
making advances against the group in Benghazi and Ajdabiya.

Since the Battle of Sirte (12 May – 6 December 2016) ISIL lost most of its
territories in Libya to the forces of the Government of National Accord (GNA),
backed by the United States. As of 2017, the ISIL-affiliated Shura Council of
Benghazi Revolutionaries controls only small parts of Benghazi.

On 10 November 2014, many members of the group Ansar Bait al-Maqdis took an oath
of allegiance to al-Baghdadi. Following this, the group assumed the designation
Sinai Province (Wilayat Sinai). They are estimated to have 1,000–2,000 fighters.
A faction of the Sinai group also operates in the Gaza Strip, calling itself the
Islamic State in Gaza. It claimed responsibility for the downing of Russian
Metrojet Flight 9268, which killed all 224 people on board, although Egyptian
officials disputed the claim.

Members of Jund al-Khilafah swore allegiance to ISIL in September 2014. ISIL in
Algeria gained notoriety when it beheaded French tourist Herve Gourdel in
September 2014. Since then, the group has largely been silent, with reports that
its leader Khalid Abu-Sulayman was killed by Algerian forces in December 2014.

On 26 January 2015, Khorasan Province (Wilayat Khorasan) was established, with
Hafiz Saeed Khan named as Wāli (Governor) and Abdul Rauf as his deputy after
both swore an oath of allegiance to al-Baghdadi. The name Khorasan refers to a
historical region that includes Afghanistan, Pakistan, and "other nearby lands".

On 9 February 2015, Mullah Abdul Rauf was killed by a NATO airstrike, and his
replacement, Hafiz Wahidi, was killed by the Afghan Armed Forces on 18 March
2015. Hafiz Saeed Khan, the Emir of ISIL's Khorasan Province, was reportedly
killed in a US drone strike in eastern Afghanistan on 25 July 2016.

On 13 November 2014, unidentified militants in Yemen pledged allegiance to ISIL.
By December of that year, ISIL had built an active presence inside Yemen, with
its recruitment drive bringing it into direct competition with
al-Qaeda-affiliated al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP). In February 2015,
it was reported that some members of Ansar al-Sharia in Yemen had split from
AQAP and pledged allegiance to ISIL. As the Yemeni Civil War escalated in March
2015, at least seven ISIL Wilayat, named after existing provincial boundaries in
Yemen, claimed responsibility for attacks against the Houthis, including the
Hadhramaut Province, the Shabwah Province, and the Sana'a Province.

Shi'a Houthis (Revolutionary Committee) are principal enemies of Yemen's ISIL
branch. The US supports the Saudi-led military intervention in Yemen against the
Houthis, but many in US SOCOM reportedly favour Houthis, as they have been an
effective force in rolling back al-Qaeda and recently ISIL in Yemen, "something
that hundreds of U.S. drone strikes and large numbers of advisers to Yemen's
military had failed to accomplish". The Guardian reported: "As another 50
civilians die in the forgotten war, only Isis and al-Qaida are gaining from a
conflict tearing Yemen apart and leaving 20 million people in need of aid."

On 7 March 2015, Boko Haram's leader Abubakar Shekau pledged allegiance to the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant via an audio message posted on the
organisation's Twitter account. On 12 March 2015, ISIL's spokesman Abu Mohammad
al-Adnani released an audio tape in which he welcomed the pledge of allegiance,
and described it as an expansion of the group's caliphate into West Africa. ISIL
publications from late March 2015 began referring to members of Boko Haram as
part of Wilayat Gharb Afriqiya (West Africa Province). The group suffered a
split in 2016, with ISIL appointing 'Abu Musab al-Barnawi' as the group's new
leader, due to disagreements with Abubakar Shekau's leadership. This was
rejected by Shekau and his supporters, who continued to operate independently.

Some commanders of the Caucasus Emirate in Chechnya and Dagestan switched their
allegiance to ISIL in late 2014 and early 2015. On 23 June 2015, ISIL spokesman
Abu Mohammad al-Adnani accepted the pledges of allegiance and announced a new
Caucasus Province (Wilayat al-Qawqaz) under the leadership of Rustam Asildarov.

On 23 July 2014, Abu Sayyaf leader Isnilon Totoni Hapilon in the Philippines
swore an oath of loyalty to Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of ISIL. In
September 2014, the group began kidnapping people so they could be held for
ransom, in the name of ISIL. In early 2015, members of Khalifa Islamiyah
Mindanao pledged allegiance to ISIL. At the same time, Ansar Khalifa Philippines
was born from a merger of Ansar Khalifah Sarangani with other umbrella groups
that are pro-ISIL in nature.[citation needed]

In February 2014, the Mujahideen Shura Council in the Environs of Jerusalem
declared its support for ISIL. On 2 April 2015, elements of this group, along
with members of the Army of Islam and the Gaza faction of Ansar Bait al-Maqdis,
formed the Sheikh Omar Hadid Brigade, also known as Islamic State in Gaza, as it
predominantly operates in the Gaza Strip.

Many countries and international bodies have officially designated ISIL as a
terrorist organisation.

The group has attracted widespread criticism internationally for its extremism,
from governments and international bodies such as the United Nations and Amnesty
International. On 24 September 2014, United Nations Secretary-General Ban
Ki-Moon stated: "As Muslim leaders around the world have said, groups like ISIL
– or Da’ish – have nothing to do with Islam, and they certainly do not represent
a state. They should more fittingly be called the 'Un-Islamic Non-State'." ISIL
has been classified a terrorist organisation by the United Nations, the European
Union and its member states, the United States, Russia, India, Turkey, Saudi
Arabia and many other countries (see § Classification). Over 60 countries are
directly or indirectly waging war against ISIL (see § Countries and groups at
war with ISIL). The group was described as a cult in a Huffington Post column by
notable cult authority Steven Hassan.

Around the world, Islamic religious leaders have overwhelmingly condemned ISIL's
ideology and actions, arguing that the group has strayed from the path of true
Islam and that its actions do not reflect the religion's real teachings or
virtues.

Extremism within Islam goes back to the 7th century, to the Khawarijes. From
their essentially political position, the Kharijites developed extreme doctrines
which set them apart from both mainstream Sunni and Shia Muslims. They were
particularly noted for adopting a radical approach to takfir, whereby they
declared other Muslims to be unbelievers and therefore deemed worthy of death.
Other scholars have also described the group not as Sunnis, but as Khawarij.
Sunni critics, including Salafi and jihadist muftis such as Adnan al-Aroor and
Abu Basir al-Tartusi, say that ISIL and related terrorist groups are not Sunnis,
but are instead modern-day Kharijites (Muslims who have stepped outside the
mainstream of Islam) serving an imperial anti-Islamic agenda.

ISIL has received severe criticism from Muslim religious scholars and
theologians. In late August 2014, the Grand Mufti of Saudi Arabia, Abdul-Aziz
ibn Abdullah Al ash-Sheikh, condemned ISIL and al-Qaeda saying, "Extremist and
militant ideas and terrorism which spread decay on Earth, destroying human
civilization, are not in any way part of Islam, but are enemy number one of
Islam, and Muslims are their first victims". In late September 2014, 126 Sunni
imams and Islamic scholars—primarily Sufi—from around the Muslim world signed an
open letter to the Islamic State's leader al-Baghdadi, explicitly rejecting and
refuting his group's interpretations of Islamic scriptures, the Quran and
hadith, which it used in order to justify its actions. "[You] have
misinterpreted Islam into a religion of harshness, brutality, torture and murder
... this is a great wrong and an offence to Islam, to Muslims and to the entire
world", the letter states. It rebukes the Islamic State for its killing of
prisoners, describing the killings as "heinous war crimes" and its persecution
of the Yazidis of Iraq as "abominable". Referring to the "self-described
'Islamic State'", the letter censures the group for carrying out killings and
acts of brutality under the guise of jihad—holy struggle—saying that its
"sacrifice" without legitimate cause, goals and intention "is not jihad at all,
but rather, warmongering and criminality". It also accuses the group of
instigating fitna—sedition—by instituting slavery under its rule in
contravention of the anti-slavery consensus of the Islamic scholarly community.

According to The New York Times, "All of the most influential jihadist theorists
are criticising the Islamic State as deviant, calling its self-proclaimed
caliphate null and void" and they have denounced it for its beheadings of
journalists and aid workers. ISIL is widely denounced by a broad range of
Islamic clerics, including al-Qaeda-oriented clerics and Saudi clerics. Muhammad
al-Yaqoubi states, "It is enough of a proof of the extreme ideology of ISIS that
the top leaders of Salafi-Jihadism have disclaimed it." Other critics of ISIL's
brand of Sunni Islam include Salafists who previously publicly supported
jihadist groups such as al-Qaeda: for example, the Saudi government official
Saleh Al-Fawzan, known for his extremist views, who claims that ISIL is a
creation of "Zionists, Crusaders and Safavids", and the Jordanian-Palestinian
writer Abu Muhammad al-Maqdisi, the former spiritual mentor to Abu Musab
al-Zarqawi, who was released from prison in Jordan in June 2014 and accused ISIL
of driving a wedge between Muslims.

The group's declaration of a caliphate has been criticised and its legitimacy
has been disputed by Middle Eastern governments, other jihadist groups, and by
Sunni Muslim theologians and historians. Qatar-based TV broadcaster and
theologian Yusuf al-Qaradawi stated: "[The] declaration issued by the Islamic
State is void under sharia and has dangerous consequences for the Sunnis in Iraq
and for the revolt in Syria", adding that the title of caliph can "only be given
by the entire Muslim nation", not by a single group. The group's execution of
Muslims for breach of traditional sharia law while violating it itself
(encouraging women to emigrate to its territory, travelling without a Wali—male
guardian—and in violation of his wishes) has been criticised; as has its love of
archaic imagery (horsemen and swords) while engaging in bid‘ah (religious
innovation) in establishing female religious police (known as Al-Khansaa
Brigade). In a similar vein, the Syrian Islamic scholar Muhammad al-Yaqoubi
says, "[t]he followers of ISIS do not want to adhere to Islamic law but rather
they want to twist Islamic law to conform to their fantasies. To this end, they
pick and choose the evidences that corroborate their misguidance, despite being
weak or abrogated."

Two days after the beheading of Hervé Gourdel, hundreds of Muslims gathered in
the Grand Mosque of Paris to show solidarity against the beheading. The protest
was led by the leader of the French Council of the Muslim Faith, Dalil
Boubakeur, and was joined by thousands of other Muslims around the country under
the slogan "Not in my name". French president François Hollande said Gourdel's
beheading was "cowardly" and "cruel", and confirmed that airstrikes would
continue against ISIL in Iraq. Hollande also called for three days of national
mourning, with flags flown at half-mast throughout the country and said that
security would be increased throughout Paris.

An Islamic Front sharia court judge in Aleppo, Mohamed Najeeb Bannan, stated:
"The legal reference is the Islamic Sharia. The cases are different, from
robberies to drug use, to moral crimes. It's our duty to look at any crime that
comes to us. . . After the regime has fallen, we believe that the Muslim
majority in Syria will ask for an Islamic state. Of course, it's very important
to point out that some say the Islamic Sharia will cut off people's hands and
heads, but it only applies to criminals. And to start off by killing, crucifying
etc. That is not correct at all." In response to being asked what the difference
between the Islamic Front's and ISIL's version of sharia would be, he said, "One
of their mistakes is before the regime has fallen, and before they've
established what in Sharia is called Tamkeen [having a stable state], they
started applying Sharia, thinking God gave them permission to control the land
and establish a Caliphate. This goes against the beliefs of religious scholars
around the world. This is what [IS] did wrong. This is going to cause a lot of
trouble. Anyone who opposes [IS] will be considered against Sharia and will be
severely punished."

Al-Qaeda and al-Nusra have been trying to take advantage of ISIL's rise, by
attempting to present themselves as "moderate" compared to "extremist" ISIL,
although it has the same aim of establishing sharia and a caliphate but doing so
in a more gradual manner. Al-Nusra has criticised the way in which ISIL fully
and immediately institutes sharia in the areas that fall under its control,
since it alienates people too much. It supports the gradual, slower approach
favoured by al-Qaeda, preparing society to accept sharia and indoctrinating
people through education before implementing the hudud aspects of sharia, such
as throwing gays from the top of buildings, chopping limbs off, and public
stoning. Al-Nusra and ISIL are both hostile towards the Druze. However, while
al-Nusra has typically destroyed Druze shrines and pressured them to convert to
Sunni Islam, ISIL regards the entire Druze community as a valid target for
violence, as it does the Yazidis.

Ayman al-Zawahiri, the leader of al-Qaeda, has called for consultation (shura)
within the "prophetic method" to be used when establishing the caliphate,
criticising al-Baghdadi for not following the required steps. Al-Zawahiri has
called upon ISIL members to close ranks and join al-Qaeda in fighting against
Assad, the Shia, Russia, Europe, and America and to stop the infighting between
jihadist groups. He called upon jihadists to establish Islamic entities in Egypt
and the Levant, slowly implementing sharia before establishing a caliphate, and
has called for violent assaults against America and the West.

The Jaysh al-Islam group within the Islamic Front criticised ISIL, saying: "They
killed the people of Islam and leave the idol worshippers ... They use the
verses talking about the disbelievers and implement it on the Muslims". The main
criticism of defectors from ISIL has been that the group is fighting and killing
other Sunni Muslims, as opposed to just non-Sunnis being brutalised. In one
case, a supposed defector from ISIL executed two activists of a Syrian
opposition group in Turkey who had sheltered them.

The current Grand Imam of al-Azhar and former president of al-Azhar University,
Ahmed el-Tayeb, has strongly condemned the Islamic State, stating that it is
acting "under the guise of this holy religion and have given themselves the name
'Islamic State' in an attempt to export their false Islam". Citing the Quran, he
stated: "The punishment for those who wage war against God and his Prophet and
who strive to sow corruption on earth is death, crucifixion, the severing of
hands and feet on opposite sides or banishment from the land. This is the
disgrace for them in this world and in the hereafter they will receive grievous
torment." Although el-Tayeb has been criticised for not expressly stating that
the Islamic State is heretical, the Ash'ari school of Islamic theology, to which
el-Tayeb belongs, does not allow calling a person who follows the shahada an
apostate. El-Tayeb has strongly come out against the practice of takfirism
(declaring a Muslim an apostate) which is used by the Islamic State to "judge
and accuse anyone who doesn’t tow their line with apostasy and outside the realm
of the faith" declaring "Jihad on peaceful Muslims" using "flawed
interpretations of some Qur’anic texts, the prophet's Sunna, and the Imams’
views believing incorrectly, that they are leaders of Muslim armies fighting
infidel peoples, in unbelieving lands".

In late December 2015, nearly 70,000 Indian Muslim clerics associated with the
Indian Barelvi movement issued a fatwa condemning ISIL and similar
organisations, saying they are "not Islamic organisations". Approximately 1.5
million Sunni Muslim followers of this movement have formally decried violent
extremists.

Hassan Hassan, an analyst at the Delma Institute, wrote in The Guardian that
because the Islamic State "bases its teachings on religious texts that
mainstream Muslim clerics do not want to deal with head on, new recruits leave
the camp feeling that they have stumbled on the true message of Islam". In
mid-February 2015, Graeme Wood, a lecturer in political science at Yale
University, said in The Atlantic, "The religion preached by its most ardent
followers derives from coherent and even learned interpretations of Islam."

Yusuf al-Qaradawi, an Egyptian Islamic theologian based in Qatar, said in his
official website that the "United Arab Emirates (UAE) and the leaders of Daesh
(ISIS/ISIL) terrorist group are from one species and they are two sides of the
same coin".

The United Nations Security Council in its Resolution 1267 (1999) described
Osama bin Laden and his al-Qaeda associates as operators of a network of
terrorist training camps. The UN's Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee first listed
ISIL in its Sanctions List under the name "Al-Qaida in Iraq" on 18 October 2004,
as an entity/group associated with al-Qaeda. On 2 June 2014, the group was added
to its listing under the name "Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant". The
European Union adopted the UN Sanctions List in 2002.

The Government of Germany banned ISIL in September 2014. Activities banned
include donations to the group, recruiting fighters, holding ISIL meetings and
distributing its propaganda, flying ISIL flags, wearing ISIL symbols and all
ISIL activities. "The terror organisation Islamic State is a threat to public
safety in Germany as well", said German politician Thomas de Maizière. He added,
"Today's ban is directed solely against terrorists who abuse religion for their
criminal goals." Being a member of ISIL is also illegal in accordance with
§ 129a and § 129b of the German criminal code.

In October 2014, Switzerland banned ISIL's activities in the country, including
propaganda and financial support of the fighters, with prison sentences as
potential penalties.

In mid-December 2014, India banned ISIL after the arrest of an operator of a
pro-ISIL Twitter account.

Pakistan designated ISIL as a banned organisation in late August 2015, under
which all elements expressing sympathy for the group would be blacklisted and
sanctioned.

By 2014, ISIL was increasingly being viewed as a militia rather than just a
terrorist group. As major Iraqi cities fell to ISIL in June 2014, Jessica Lewis,
a former US Army intelligence officer at the Institute for the Study of War,
described ISIL at that time as

Former US Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel saw an "imminent threat to every
interest we have", but former top counter-terrorism adviser Daniel Benjamin
derided such talk as a "farce" that panics the public.

Former British Foreign Secretary David Miliband concluded that the 2003 invasion
of Iraq caused the creation of ISIL.

Writing for The Guardian, Pankaj Mishra rejects the idea that the group is a
resurgence of medieval Islam, saying instead:

According to a Reuters report that cited "jihadist ideologues" as a source, 90%
of ISIL's fighters in Iraq are Iraqi, and 70% of its fighters in Syria are
Syrian. The article stated that the group has 40,000 fighters and 60,000
supporters across its two primary strongholds in Iraq and Syria. According to
scholar Fawaz Gerges writing in ISIS: A History, some "30 percent of the senior
figures" in ISIL's military command are former army and police officers from the
disbanded Iraqi security forces, drawn to ISIL by the US De-Ba'athification
policy and turn towards Islamism by Sunni following the US invasion of Iraq.

According to a poll by Pew Research Center, Muslim populations of various
countries have overwhelmingly negative views of ISIS with Lebanon having the
most unfavorable views. In most of these countries, concerns about Islamic
extremism have been growing.

Although Saudi Arabia's government rejected the claims, former Iraqi Prime
Minister Nouri al-Maliki accused Saudi Arabia of funding ISIL. Some media
outlets, such as NBC, the BBC and The New York Times, and the US-based think
tank Washington Institute for Near East Policy have written about individual
Saudi donations to the group and the Saudi state's decade-long sponsorship of
Wahhabism around the world, but have concluded that there is no evidence of
direct Saudi state support for ISIL.

Richard Dearlove, former head of Britain's Secret Intelligence Service (MI6),
said that the Saudis were "deeply attracted to any militancy that can
effectively challenge Shia-dom [Shia version of Islam]." Dearlove stated that,
"For ISIS to be able to surge into the Sunni areas of Iraq in the way that it
has done recently has to be the consequence of substantial and sustained
funding."

In an August 2014 email, leaked by WikiLeaks, former US Secretary of State
Hillary Clinton sent then counselor to Barack Obama John Podesta a memo that
states that both Saudi Arabia and Qatar "are providing clandestine financial and
logistic support to ISIL and other radical Sunni groups in the region".

During the ongoing Syrian civil war, President Bashar al-Assad, the Syrian
government, and the Syrian Alawite community have been accused by many
opposition and anti-Assad parties of collusion with ISIL, despite massacres of
Alawite civilians and executions of captured Syrian Army Alawite soldiers.
Several sources have claimed Islamist prisoners were strategically released from
Syrian prisons at the beginning of the Syrian civil war in 2011.

The Syrian government has bought oil directly from ISIL, and the Syrian
government and ISIL jointly run a HESCO gas plant in Tabqah. The facility
supplies electricity to government-held areas, and government-run power plants
supply ISIL-held areas. The Syrian government has tactically avoided ISIL forces
in order to weaken opposition such as the Free Syrian Army (FSA), and according
to United States Secretary of State John Kerry the Syrian government has
purposely ceded territory to ISIL. An IHS Jane's Terrorism and Insurgency Center
database analysis confirmed that only 6% of Syrian government forces attacks
were targeted at ISIL from January to November 2014, while in the same period
only 13% of all ISIL attacks targeted government forces. The National Coalition
for Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces has stated that the Syrian
government has operatives inside ISIL, as has the leadership of Ahrar ash-Sham.
A report on 25 June 2015 said that ISIL kept gas flowing to Assad
regime-controlled power stations. Furthermore, ISIL allowed grain to pass from
the Kurdish-held north-east to regime controlled areas at the cost of a 25%
levy.

On 1 June 2015, the United States embassy in Syria stated that the Syrian
government was "making air-strikes in support" of an ISIL advance on Syrian
opposition positions north of Aleppo. The president of the Syrian National
Coalition, Khaled Koja, accused Assad of acting "as an air force for [ISIL]",
with the Defence Minister of the SNC Salim Idris stating that approximately 180
Syrian government officers were serving in ISIL and coordinating the group's
attacks with the Syrian Arab Army.

Turkey has been accused by experts, Syrian Kurds, and United States
Vice-President Joe Biden of supporting or colluding with ISIL. A raid by US
special forces on a compound housing the Islamic State's "chief financial
officer", Abu Sayyaf, in July 2015, produced evidence that Turkish officials
dealt directly with ranking ISIL members. According to a senior Western
official, documents and flash drives seized during the Sayyaf raid revealed
links "so clear" and "undeniable" between Turkey and ISIL "that they could end
up having profound policy implications for the relationship between us and
Ankara".

Journalist Patrick Cockburn wrote in November 2014 of "strong evidence for a
degree of collaboration" between the Turkish intelligence services and ISIL,
although the "exact nature of the relationship ... remains cloudy". In July
2014, Cockburn stated that "Saudi Arabia has created a Frankenstein's monster
over which it is rapidly losing control. The same is true of its allies such as
Turkey which has been a vital back-base for Isis and Jabhat al-Nusra by keeping
the 820-kilometer-long (510 mi) Turkish-Syrian border open." David L. Phillips
of Columbia University's Institute for the Study of Human Rights, who compiled a
list of allegations and claims accusing Turkey of assisting ISIL, wrote that
these allegations "range from military cooperation and weapons transfers to
logistical support, financial assistance, and the provision of medical
services". Several ISIL fighters and commanders have claimed that Turkey
supports ISIL. Within Turkey itself, ISIL is believed to have caused increasing
political polarisation between secularists and Islamists.

Turkey has been further criticised for allowing individuals from outside the
region to enter its territory and join ISIL in Syria. With many Islamist
fighters passing through Turkey to fight in Syria, Turkey has been accused of
becoming a transit country for such fighters and has been labelled the "Gateway
to Jihad". Turkish border patrol officers are reported to have deliberately
overlooked those entering Syria, upon payment of a small bribe. A report by Sky
News exposed documents showing that passports of foreign Islamists wanting to
join ISIL by crossing into Syria had been stamped by the Turkish government. An
ISIL commander stated that "most of the fighters who joined us in the beginning
of the war came via Turkey, and so did our equipment and supplies", adding that
ISIL fighters received treatment in Turkish hospitals.

Qatar has long been accused of acting as a conduit for the flow of funds to
ISIL. While there is no proof that the Qatari government is behind the movement
of funds from the gas-rich nation to ISIL, it has been criticised for not doing
enough to stem the flow of financing. Private donors within Qatar, sympathetic
to the aims of radical groups such as al-Nusra Front and ISIL, are believed to
be channeling their resources to support these organisations. According to the
US Treasury Department, a number of terrorist financiers have been operating in
Qatar. Qatari citizen Abd Al-Rahman al-Nuaimi has served as an interlocutor
between Qatari donors and leaders of al-Qaeda in Iraq (AQI). Nuaimi reportedly
oversaw the transfer of US$2 million per month to AQI over a period of time. He
is also one of several of Qatar-based al-Qaeda financiers sanctioned by the US
Treasury in recent years. According to some reports, US officials believe that
the largest portion of private donations supporting ISIS and al Qaeda-linked
groups now comes from Qatar rather than Saudi Arabia.

In August 2014, a German minister Gerd Müller accused Qatar of having links to
ISIL, stating: "You have to ask who is arming, who is financing ISIS troops. The
keyword there is Qatar." Qatari Foreign Minister Khalid bin Mohammad Al Attiyah
rejected this statement, saying: "Qatar does not support extremist groups,
including [ISIL], in any way. We are repelled by their views, their violent
methods and their ambitions."

Rand Paul, junior U.S. Senator from Kentucky, has accused the U.S. government of
indirectly supporting ISIL in the Syrian Civil War, by arming their allies and
fighting their enemies in that country. The US has assisted the moderate Syrian
opposition, but whether that assistance has been commandeered by ISIS allies
remains unclear.

In 12 September 2014, several media outlets began reporting that the Free Syrian
Army had signed a "non-aggression pact" with ISIS in order to focus their
attentions elsewhere. These reports later proved to be false, as opposition
soldiers and activists on the ground reported continued fighting between the two
groups. According to Mohammed Alaa Ghanem, director of government relations for
the Syrian American Council, "The only report we have received on anything
resembling a ceasefire was that ISIS and Sons of Golan, an FSA brigade outside
Damascus, halted fighting for 24 hours to collect bodies before hostilities
resumed." "FSA commanders declared that they will continue that fight until ISIS
is completely eradicated in Damascus suburbs. No truce or cease fire with ISIS,"
said Syrian National Coalition spokesman Monzer Abkik.

A United Nations report from May 2015[update] showed that 25,000 "foreign
terrorist fighters" from 100 countries had joined "Islamist" groups, many of
them working for ISIL or al-Qaeda. The US-trained commander of Tajikistan's
Interior Ministry OMON police special forces, Gulmurod Khalimov, has been raised
to the rank of "Minister of War" within the Islamic State.

The commander for the Islamic State in Syria, Abu Omar al-Shishani, served
previously as a sergeant in the Georgian Army.

A 2015 report by the Program on Extremism at George Washington University found
71 individuals charged in the United States with supporting ISIL, 250 travelling
or attempting to travel to Syria or Iraq from the United States to join ISIL,
and about 900 active domestic ISIL-related investigations.

An October 2016 World Bank study found that "ISIL’s foreign fighters are
surprisingly well-educated." Using the fighters' self-reported educational
levels, the study concluded that "69% of recruits reported at least a
secondary-level education" of which "a large fraction have gone on to study at
university" and also that "only 15% of recruits left school before high school;
less than 2% are illiterate." The study also found that foreign fighters are
often more educated than their countrymen where those "from Europe and in
Central Asia have similar levels of education to their countrymen" while those
"from the Middle East, North Africa, and South and East Asia are significantly
more educated than what is typical in their home nations." The report notes that
its conclusions that terrorism is not driven by poverty and low levels of
education does not conform with previous research. However, the report did find
a strong correlation "between a country’s male unemployment rate and the
propensity of the country to supply foreign fighters" leading the report to
recommend that governments pursue a policy of lowering the unemployment rate
among the educated as a counter-terrorism strategy.

The Terrorism Research and Analysis Consortium (TRAC) has identified 60 jihadist
groups in 30 countries that have pledged allegiance to or support for ISIL as of
mid-November 2014. That many of these groups were previously affiliated with
al-Qaeda suggests a shift in global jihadist leadership towards ISIL.

The Global Coalition to Counter the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
also referred to as the Counter-ISIL Coalition or Counter-DAESH Coalition, is a
US-led group of nations and non-state actors that have committed to "work
together under a common, multifaceted, and long-term strategy to degrade and
defeat ISIL/Daesh". According to a joint statement issued by 59 national
governments and the European Union on 3 December 2014, participants in the
Counter-ISIL Coalition are focused on multiple lines of effort:

Operation Inherent Resolve is the operational name given by the US to military
operations against ISIL and Syrian al-Qaeda affiliates. Combined Joint Task
Force – Operation Inherent Resolve (CJTF–OIR) is co-ordinating the military
portion of the response.

The following multi-national organisations are part of the Counter-ISIL
Coalition: Arab League — coordinating member response European Union – declared
to be part, 27 members are participating, Malta not participating; NATO – all 28
members are taking part; Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf or
GCC – all six current members and the two pending members, Jordan and Morocco,
are taking part.

Iran – military advisors, training, ground troops, and air power in Iraq and
Syria, beside Iranian borders (see Iranian intervention in Iraq)

Russia – arms supplier to Iraqi and Syrian governments. In June 2014, the Iraqi
army received Russian Sukhoi Su-25 and Sukhoi Su-30 fighter aircraft to combat
the ISIL. Security operations within state borders in 2015. Airstrikes in Syria
(see Russian military intervention in the Syrian Civil War).

Pakistan – Military deployment over Saudi Arabia-Iraq border. Arresting ISIL
figures in Pakistan.

Kurdistan Workers' Party—ground troops in Iraqi Kurdistan and in Syrian
Kurdistan Hezbollah Houthis—Shia faction in Yemen, fighting for control of the
country

Al-Nusra Front is a branch of al-Qaeda operating in Syria. Al-Nusra has launched
many attacks and bombings, mostly against targets affiliated with or supportive
of the Syrian government. There have been media reports that many of al-Nusra's
foreign fighters have left to join al-Baghdadi's ISIL.

In February 2014, after continued tensions, al-Qaeda publicly disavowed any
relations with ISIL. However, ISIL and al-Nusra Front still cooperate with each
other occasionally when they fight against the Syrian government.

On 10 September 2015, an audio message was released by al-Qaeda's leader Ayman
al-Zawahiri criticising ISIL's self-proclaimed caliphate and accusing it of
"sedition". This was described by some media outlets as a "declaration of war".
However, although al-Zawahiri denied ISIL's legitimacy, he suggested that there
was still room for cooperation against common enemies, and said that if he were
in Iraq, he would fight alongside ISIL.

After the November 2015 Paris attacks, the hacktivist group Anonymous announced
that it had declared "war" on ISIL. Days after the attack, Anonymous tweeted
that it had taken down "more than 5,500" Twitter accounts belonging to ISIL
supporters. The group also released a "target list" for its members, including
"ISIS member Twitter accounts, Syrian Internet Service Providers, and
ISIS-related e-mail and Web servers". A Telegram account allegedly linked to
ISIL responded by calling them "idiots". A spokesman for Twitter told The Daily
Dot that Twitter is not using the lists of accounts being reported by Anonymous,
as they have been found to be "wildly inaccurate" and include accounts used by
academics and journalists.

In July 2014, the BBC reported the United Nations' chief investigator as
stating: "Fighters from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) may be
added to a list of war crimes suspects in Syria." By June 2014, according to
United Nations reports, ISIL had killed hundreds of prisoners of war and over
1,000 civilians.

In November 2014, the UN Commission of Inquiry on Syria said that ISIL was
committing crimes against humanity. A report by Human Rights Watch in November
2014 accused ISIL groups in control of Derna, Libya of war crimes and human
rights abuses and of terrorising residents. Human Rights Watch documented three
apparent summary executions and at least ten public floggings by the Islamic
Youth Shura Council, which joined ISIL in November. It also documented the
beheading of three Derna residents and dozens of seemingly politically motivated
assassinations of judges, public officials, members of the security forces and
others. Sarah Leah Watson, Director of HRW Middle East and North Africa, said:
"Commanders should understand that they may face domestic or international
prosecution for the grave rights abuses their forces are committing."

Speaking of ISIL's methods, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights has
stated that the group "seeks to subjugate civilians under its control and
dominate every aspect of their lives through terror, indoctrination, and the
provision of services to those who obey".

ISIL compels people in the areas that it controls to live according to its
interpretation of sharia law. There have been many reports of the group's use of
death threats, torture and mutilation to compel conversion to Islam, and of
clerics being killed for refusal to pledge allegiance to the so-called "Islamic
State". ISIL directs violence against Shia Muslims, Alawites, Assyrian,
Chaldean, Syriac and Armenian Christians, Yazidis, Druze, Shabaks and Mandeans
in particular.

ISIL fighters are targeting Syria's minority Alawite sect. The Islamic State and
affiliated jihadist groups reportedly took the lead in an offensive on Alawite
villages in Latakia Governorate of Syria in August 2013.

Amnesty International has held ISIL responsible for the ethnic cleansing of
ethnic and religious minority groups in northern Iraq on a "historic scale",
putting entire communities "at risk of being wiped off the map of Iraq". In a
special report released on 2 September 2014, the organization described how ISIL
had "systematically targeted non-Arab and non-Sunni Muslim communities, killing
or abducting hundreds, possibly thousands, of individuals and forcing more than
830,000 others to flee the areas it has captured since 10 June 2014". Among
these people were Assyrian Christians, Turkmen Shia, Shabak Shia, Kaka'i,
Yazidis and Sabean Mandeans, who have lived together for centuries in Nineveh
province, large parts of which have come under ISIL's control.

Among the known killings of religious and minority group civilians carried out
by ISIL are those in the villages and towns of Quiniyeh (70–90 Yazidis killed),
Hardan (60 Yazidis killed), Sinjar (500–2,000 Yazidis killed), Ramadi Jabal
(60–70 Yazidis killed), Dhola (50 Yazidis killed), Khana Sor (100 Yazidis
killed), Hardan (250–300 Yazidis killed), al-Shimal (dozens of Yazidis killed),
Khocho (400 Yazidis killed and 1,000 abducted), Jadala (14 Yazidis killed) and
Beshir (700 Shia Turkmen killed), and others committed near Mosul (670 Shia
inmates of the Badush prison killed), and in Tal Afar prison, Iraq (200 Yazidis
killed for refusing conversion). The UN estimated that 5,000 Yazidis were killed
by ISIL during the takeover of parts of northern Iraq in August 2014. In late
May 2014, 150 Kurdish boys from Kobani aged 14–16 were abducted and subjected to
torture and abuse, according to Human Rights Watch. In the Syrian towns of
Ghraneij, Abu Haman and Kashkiyeh 700 members of the Sunni Al-Shaitat tribe were
killed for attempting an uprising against ISIL control. The UN reported that in
June 2014 ISIL had killed a number of Sunni Islamic clerics who refused to
pledge allegiance to it.

Christians living in areas under ISIL control face four options: converting to
Islam, paying a religious levy called the jizya, leaving the "Caliphate", or
death. "We offer them three choices: Islam; the dhimma contract – involving
payment of jizya; if they refuse this they will have nothing but the sword",
ISIL said. ISIL leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi further noted that Christians who do
not agree with those terms must "leave the borders of the Islamic Caliphate"
within a specified deadline. ISIL had already set similar rules for Christians
in Raqqa, once one of Syria's more liberal cities. However, on 29 March 2016,
ISIL issued a decree preventing Christians and Armenians from leaving Raqqa.

On 23 February 2015, in response to a major Kurdish offensive in the Al-Hasakah
Governorate, ISIL abducted 150 Assyrian Christians from villages near Tal Tamr
(Tell Tamer) in northeastern Syria, after launching a large offensive in the
region.

Kurdish officials have claimed that ISIL's campaign against Kurdish and Yezidi
enclaves, such as Sinjar, are part of an organised Arabization plan.

During the Iraqi conflict in 2014, ISIL released dozens of videos showing its
ill treatment of civilians, many of whom had apparently been targeted on the
basis of their religion or ethnicity. Navi Pillay, UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights, warned of war crimes being committed in the Iraqi war zone, and
disclosed a UN report of ISIL militants murdering Iraqi Army soldiers and 17
civilians in a single street in Mosul. The UN reported that in the 17 days from
5 to 22 June, ISIL killed more than 1,000 Iraqi civilians and injured more than
1,000. After ISIL released photographs of its fighters shooting scores of young
men, the UN declared that cold-blooded "executions" by militants in northern
Iraq almost certainly amounted to war crimes.

ISIL's advance in Iraq in mid-2014 was accompanied by continuing violence in
Syria. On 29 May, ISIL raided a village in Syria and at least 15 civilians were
killed, including, according to Human Rights Watch, at least six children. A
hospital in the area confirmed that it had received 15 bodies on the same day.
The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights reported that on 1 June, a 102-year-old
man was killed along with his whole family in a village in Hama province.
According to Reuters, 1,878 people were killed in Syria by ISIL during the last
six months of 2014, most of them civilians.

In Mosul, ISIL has implemented a sharia school curriculum which bans the
teaching of art, music, national history, literature and Christianity. Although
Charles Darwin's theory of evolution has never been taught in Iraqi schools, the
subject has been banned from the school curriculum. Patriotic songs have been
declared blasphemous, and orders have been given to remove certain pictures from
school textbooks. Iraqi parents have largely boycotted schools in which the new
curriculum has been introduced.

After capturing cities in Iraq, ISIL issued guidelines on how to wear clothes
and veils. ISIL warned women in the city of Mosul to wear full-face veils or
face severe punishment. A cleric told Reuters in Mosul that ISIL gunmen had
ordered him to read out the warning in his mosque when worshippers gathered.
ISIL ordered the faces of both male and female mannequins to be covered, in an
order which also banned the use of naked mannequins. In Raqqa the group uses its
two battalions of female fighters in the city to enforce compliance by women
with its strict laws on individual conduct.

ISIL released 16 notes labelled "Contract of the City", a set of rules aimed at
civilians in Nineveh. One rule stipulated that women should stay at home and not
go outside unless necessary. Another rule said that stealing would be punished
by amputation. In addition to the Muslim custom of banning the sale and use of
alcohol, ISIL has banned the sale and use of cigarettes and hookah pipes. It has
also banned "music and songs in cars, at parties, in shops and in public, as
well as photographs of people in shop windows".

According to The Economist, Saudi practices also followed by the group include
the establishment of religious police to root out "vice" and enforce attendance
at salat prayers, the widespread use of capital punishment, and the destruction
of Christian churches and non-Sunni mosques or their conversion to other uses.

ISIL carried out executions on both men and women who were accused of various
acts and found guilty of crimes against Islam such as sodomy, adultery, usage
and possession of contraband, rape, blasphemy, witchcraft, renouncing Islam and
murder. Before the accused are executed their charges are read to them and the
spectators. Executions take various forms, including stoning to death,
crucifixions, beheadings, burning people alive, and throwing people from tall
buildings. The Islamic State in Iraq frequently carries out mass executions in
Mosul and Hawija.

The Islamic State militants were accused of using civilian residents of towns as
human shields. The Telegraph reported that "Extremist fighters are deliberately
hiding among civilian buildings and residents to try to prevent strikes." Civil
rights activist told ARA News that "ISIS militants prevent the people of Manbij
and Jarablus from leaving their hometowns despite the fierce airstrikes by
Russian warplanes".

According to a report by the magazine Foreign Policy, children as young as six
are recruited or kidnapped and sent to military and religious training camps,
where they practice beheading with dolls and are indoctrinated with the
religious views of ISIL. Children are used as human shields on front lines and
to provide blood transfusions for Islamic State soldiers, according to Shelly
Whitman of the Roméo Dallaire Child Soldiers Initiative. The second instalment
of a Vice News documentary about ISIL focused on how the group is specifically
grooming children for the future. A spokesman told VICE News that those under
the age of 15 go to sharia camp to learn about religion, while those older than
16 can go to military training camp. Children are also used for propaganda.
According to a UN report, "In mid-August, ISIL entered a cancer hospital in
Mosul, forced at least two sick children to hold the ISIL flag and posted the
pictures on the internet." Misty Buswell, a Save the Children representative
working with refugees in Jordan, said, "It's not an exaggeration to say we could
lose a whole generation of children to trauma." A UN report indicated that at
least 89 children, mostly from the ages of 12 to 16 had been killed fighting for
the Islamic State in 2015, 39% of which died in suicide bombing attacks. Der
Spiegel estimated in 2016 that 1,500 boys were serving as child soldiers for
ISIL. It was reported that on 12 March 2017, ISIS used 6 child suicide bombers
against the Syrian Army soldiers besieged in Deir Ez-zor.

Sexual violence perpetrated by ISIL includes using rape as a weapon of war;
instituting forced marriages to its fighters; and trading women and girls as sex
slaves.

There are many reports of sexual abuse and enslavement in ISIL-controlled areas
of women and girls, predominantly from the minority Christian and Yazidi
communities. Fighters are told that they are free to have sex with or rape
non-Muslim captive women. Haleh Esfandiari from the Woodrow Wilson International
Center for Scholars has highlighted the abuse of local women by ISIL militants
after they have captured an area. "They usually take the older women to a
makeshift slave market and try to sell them. The younger girls ... are raped or
married off to fighters", she said, adding, "It's based on temporary marriages,
and once these fighters have had sex with these young girls, they just pass them
on to other fighters."

The capture of Iraqi cities by the group in June 2014 was accompanied by an
upsurge in crimes against women, including kidnap and rape. According to Martin
Williams in The Citizen, some hard-line Salafists apparently regard extramarital
sex with multiple partners as a legitimate form of holy war and it is "difficult
to reconcile this with a religion where some adherents insist that women must be
covered from head to toe, with only a narrow slit for the eyes".

As of August 2015, the trade in sex slaves appeared to remain restricted to
Yazidi women and girls. It has reportedly become a recruiting technique to
attract men from conservative Muslim societies, where dating and casual sex are
not allowed. Nazand Begikhani said of the Yazidi victims, "These women have been
treated like cattle ... They have been subjected to physical and sexual
violence, including systematic rape and sex slavery. They've been exposed in
markets in Mosul and in Raqqa, Syria, carrying price tags." According to UN
Reports the price list for IS sex slaves range from 40 to 160 US dollars. The
younger the slave the more expensive. Girls and boys between the age 1–9 are
referred to as the most expensive, with the cheapest being women between 40 and
50 years old. According to another source the price of a slave equals the price
of an AK-47.

A United Nations report issued on 2 October 2014, based on 500 interviews with
witnesses, said that ISIL took 450–500 women and girls to Iraq's Nineveh region
in August, where "150 unmarried girls and women, predominantly from the Yazidi
and Christian communities, were reportedly transported to Syria, either to be
given to ISIL fighters as a reward or to be sold as sex slaves". In mid-October,
the UN confirmed that 5,000–7,000 Yazidi women and children had been abducted by
ISIL and sold into slavery. In November 2014 The New York Times reported on the
accounts given by five who escaped ISIL of their captivity and abuse. In
December 2014, the Iraqi Ministry of Human Rights announced that ISIL had killed
over 150 women and girls in Fallujah who refused to participate in sexual jihad.
Non-Muslim women have reportedly been married off to fighters against their
will. ISIL claims the women provide the new converts and children necessary to
spread ISIL's control.

Shortly after the death of US hostage Kayla Mueller was confirmed on 10 February
2015, several media outlets reported that the US intelligence community believed
she may have been given as a wife to an ISIL fighter. In August 2015 it was
confirmed that she had been forced into marriage to Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, who
raped her repeatedly. The Mueller family was informed by the US Federal Bureau
of Investigation (FBI) that Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi had sexually abused Ms.
Mueller, and that Ms. Mueller had also been tortured. Abu Sayyaf's widow, Umm
Sayyaf, confirmed that it was her husband who had been Mueller's primary abuser.

In its digital magazine Dabiq, ISIL explicitly claimed religious justification
for enslaving Yazidi women. According to The Wall Street Journal, ISIL appeals
to apocalyptic beliefs and claims "justification by a Hadith that they interpret
as portraying the revival of slavery as a precursor to the end of the world".
ISIL appeals to the hadith and Quran when claiming the right to enslave and rape
captive non-Muslim women. According to Dabiq, "enslaving the families of the
kuffar and taking their women as concubines is a firmly established aspect of
the Sharia's that if one were to deny or mock, he would be denying or mocking
the verses of the Quran and the narration of the Prophet ... and thereby
apostatizing from Islam." Captured Yazidi women and children are divided among
the fighters who captured them, with one fifth taken as a tax. ISIL has received
widespread criticism from Muslim scholars and others in the Muslim world for
using part of the Quran to derive a ruling in isolation, rather than considering
the entire Quran and hadith. According to Mona Siddiqui, ISIL's "narrative may
well be wrapped up in the familiar language of jihad and 'fighting in the cause
of Allah', but it amounts to little more than destruction of anything and anyone
who doesn't agree with them"; she describes ISIL as reflecting a "lethal mix of
violence and sexual power" and a "deeply flawed view of manhood". Dabiq
describes "this large-scale enslavement" of non-Muslims as "probably the first
since the abandonment of Shariah law".

In late 2014, ISIL released a pamphlet that focused on the treatment of female
slaves. It claims that the Quran allows fighters to have sex with captives,
including adolescent girls, and to beat slaves as discipline. The pamphlet's
guidelines also allow fighters to trade slaves, including for sex, as long as
they have not been impregnated by their owners. Charlie Winter, a researcher at
the counter-extremist think tank Quilliam, described the pamphlet as
"abhorrent". In response to this document Abbas Barzegar, a religion professor
at Georgia State University, said Muslims around the world find ISIL's "alien
interpretation of Islam grotesque and abhorrent". Muslim leaders and scholars
from around the world have rejected the validity of ISIL's claims, claiming that
the reintroduction of slavery is un-Islamic, that they are required to protect
"People of the Scripture" including Christians, Jews, Muslims and Yazidis, and
that ISIL's fatwas are invalid due to their lack of religious authority and the
fatwas' inconsistency with Islam.

The Independent reported in 2015 that the usage of Yazidi sex slaves had created
ongoing friction among fighters within ISIL. Sajad Jiyad, a Research Fellow and
Associate Member at the Iraqi Institute for Economic Reform, told the newspaper
that many ISIL supporters and fighters had been in denial about the trafficking
of kidnapped Yazidi women until a Dabiq article justifying the practice was
published. The New York Times said in August 2015 that "[t]he systematic rape of
women and girls from the Yazidi religious minority has become deeply enmeshed in
the organization and the radical theology of the Islamic State in the year since
the group announced it was reviving slavery as an institution." The article
claims that ISIL is not merely exonerating but sacralising rape, and illustrated
this with the testimony of escapees. One 15-year-old victim said that, while she
was being assaulted, her rapist "kept telling me this is ibadah"; a 12-year-old
victim related how her assailant claimed that, "by raping me, he is drawing
closer to God"; and one adult prisoner told how, when she challenged her captor
about repeatedly raping a 12 year old, she was met with the retort, "No, she's
not a little girl, she's a slave and she knows exactly how to have sex and
having sex with her pleases God."

In July 2016 it was reported by an AP investigation that ISIL was using mobile
apps like Telegram to sell their sex slaves and identify the slaves of other
ISIL members at checkpoints. In 2016, the Commission for International Justice
and Accountability said they had identified 34 senior ISIL members who were
instrumental in the systematic sex slave trade and planned to prosecute them
after the end of hostilities.

The Committee to Protect Journalists states: "Without a free press, few other
human rights are attainable." ISIL has tortured and murdered local journalists,
creating what Reporters Without Borders calls "news blackholes" in areas
controlled by ISIL. ISIL fighters have reportedly been given written directions
to kill or capture journalists.

In December 2013, two suicide bombers stormed the headquarters of TV station
Salaheddin and killed five journalists, after accusing the station of
"distorting the image of Iraq's Sunni community". Reporters Without Borders
reported that on 7 September 2014, ISIL seized and on 11 October publicly
beheaded Raad al-Azzawi, a TV Salaheddin cameraman from the village of Samra,
east of Tikrit. As of October 2014, according to the Journalistic Freedoms
Observatory, ISIL is holding nine journalists and has nine others under close
observation in Mosul and Salahuddin province.

During 2013 and part of 2014, an ISIL unit nicknamed the Beatles acquired and
held 12 Western journalists hostage, along with aid workers and other foreign
hostages, totalling 23 or 24 known hostages. A Polish journalist Marcin Suder
was captured in July 2013 but escaped four months later. The unit executed
American journalists James Foley (journalist) James Foley and Steven Sotloff and
released beheading videos. Eight of the other journalists were released for
ransom: Danish journalist Daniel Rye Ottosen, French journalists Didier
François, Edouard Elias, Nicolas Hénin, and Pierre Torres, and Spanish
journalists Marc Marginedas, Javier Espinosa, and Ricardo García Vilanova. The
unit continues to hold hostage British journalist John Cantlie and a female aid
worker.

Cyber-security group the Citizen Lab released a report finding a possible link
between ISIL and a digital attack on the Syrian citizen media group Raqqa Is
Being Slaughtered Silently (RSS). Supporters of the media group received an
emailed link to an image of supposed airstrikes, but clicking on the link
introduced malware to the user's computer that sends details of the user's IP
address and system each time it restarts. That information has been enough to
allow ISIL to locate RSS supporters. "The group has been targeted for
kidnappings, house raids, and at least one alleged targeted killing. At the time
of that writing, ISIL was allegedly holding several citizen journalists in
Raqqa", according to the Citizen Lab report.

On 8 January 2015, ISIL members in Libya claimed to have executed Tunisian
journalists Sofiene Chourabi and Nadhir Ktari who disappeared in September 2014.
Also in January 2015, Japanese journalist Kenji Goto was kidnapped and beheaded,
after a demand for a $200 million ransom payment was not met.

An unknown number of Syrians and Iraqis, several Lebanese soldiers, male and
female Kurdish fighters near Kobanî, two American journalists, one American and
two British aid workers, 30 Ethiopian Christians and 21 Egyptian Coptic
Christians in Libya have been beheaded by the Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant. ISIL uses beheadings to intimidate local populations and has released a
series of propaganda videos aimed at Western countries. ISIL was reported to
have beheaded about 100 foreign fighters as deserters who tried to leave Raqqa.

They also engage in public and mass executions of Syrian and Iraqi soldiers and
civilians, sometimes forcing prisoners to dig their own graves before shooting
lines of prisoners and pushing them in. Among the known mass executions of
captured soldiers carried out by ISIL are those in Tikrit (ISIS executed up to
1,700 Shia Iraqi Air Force cadets from Camp Speicher near Tikrit on 12 June
2014), Al-Thawrah (ISIS executed 250 Syrian soldiers captured at the Al-Tabqa
air base between 27 and 28 August 2014), Palmyra (up to 280 Syrian soldiers and
government loyalists were shot in the head or beheaded in a public square on 22
May 2015), and Deir ez-Zor (ISIS killed at least 300 Syrian soldiers,
pro-government militiamen and their families on 16 January 2016).

ISIS executed 600 Shia prisoners in Mosul in June 2014. In November 2014, there
were reports that ISIS fighters massacred more than 630 members of the Albu Nimr
tribe in Iraq. Albu Nimr was one of the Sunni Arab tribes that fiercely opposed
the Islamic State. On 17 December 2014, it was reported by Turkish media, that
the ISIS had executed at least 150 women from the Albu Nimr tribe in Falluja for
refusing to marry ISIS militants.

Kurds in northern Iraq reported being attacked by ISIS with chemical weapons in
August 2015, which was later confirmed to be mustard gas. At Kobanî, it is
highly likely that ISIS used chlorine gas. These chemical weapons may be from a
chemical weapons storage site at Al-Muthanna, which contained 2,500 chemical
rockets. Although the rockets' chemical contents were deteriorated, ISIS may
have used them in a concentrated manner.

UNESCO's Director-General Irina Bokova has warned that ISIL is destroying Iraq's
cultural heritage, in what she has called "cultural cleansing". "We don't have
time to lose because extremists are trying to erase the identity, because they
know that if there is no identity, there is no memory, there is no history", she
said. Referring to the ancient cultures of Christians, Yazidis and other
minorities, she said, "This is a way to destroy identity. You deprive them of
their culture, you deprive them of their history, their heritage, and that is
why it goes hand in hand with genocide. Along with the physical persecution they
want to eliminate – to delete – the memory of these different cultures. ... we
think this is appalling, and this is not acceptable." Saad Eskander, head of
Iraq's National Archives said, "For the first time you have cultural
cleansing... For the Yazidis, religion is oral, nothing is written. By
destroying their places of worship ... you are killing cultural memory. It is
the same with the Christians – it really is a threat beyond belief."

To finance its activities, ISIL is stealing artefacts from Syria and Iraq and
sending them to Europe to be sold. UNESCO has asked for United Nations Security
Council controls on the sale of antiquities, similar to those imposed after the
2003 Iraq War. UNESCO is working with Interpol, national customs authorities,
museums, and major auction houses in attempts to prevent looted items from being
sold. ISIL occupied Mosul Museum, the second most important museum in Iraq, as
it was about to reopen after years of rebuilding following the Iraq War, saying
that the statues were against Islam and threatening to destroy the museum's
contents.

ISIL considers worshipping at graves tantamount to idolatry, and seeks to purify
the community of unbelievers. It has used bulldozers to crush buildings and
archaeological sites. Bernard Haykel has described al-Baghdadi's creed as "a
kind of untamed Wahhabism", saying, "For Al Qaeda, violence is a means to an
ends; for ISIS, it is an end in itself". The destruction by ISIL in July 2014 of
the tomb and shrine of the prophet Yunus – Jonah in Christianity – the
13th-century mosque of Imam Yahya Abu al-Qassimin, the 14th-century shrine of
prophet Jerjis – St George to Christians – and the attempted destruction of the
Hadba minaret at the 12th-century Great Mosque of Al-Nuri have been described as
"an unchecked outburst of extreme Wahhabism". "There were explosions that
destroyed buildings dating back to the Assyrian era", said National Museum of
Iraq director Qais Rashid, referring to the destruction of the shrine of Yunus.
He cited another case where "Daesh (ISIL) gathered over 1,500 manuscripts from
convents and other holy places and burnt all of them in the middle of the city
square". In March 2015, ISIL reportedly bulldozed the 13th-century BC Assyrian
city of Nimrud, believing its sculptures to be idolatrous. UNESCO head, Irina
Bokova, deemed this to be a war crime.

ISIL has burned or stolen collections of books and papers from the various
locations including the Central Library of Mosul (which they rigged with
explosives and burned down), the library at the University of Mosul, a Sunni
Muslim library, a 265-year-old Latin Church and Monastery of the Dominican
Fathers, and the Mosul Museum Library. Some destroyed or stolen works date back
to 5000 BCE and include "Iraq newspapers dating to the early 20th century, maps
and books from the Ottoman Empire, and book collections contributed by about 100
of Mosul's establishment families." The stated goal is to destroy all
non-Islamic books.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eid_al-Fitr

Eid al-Fitr (Arabic: عيد الفطر‎‎ ʻĪd al-Fiṭr, IPA: [ʕiːd al fitˤr], "festival of
breaking of the fast") is an important religious holiday celebrated by Muslims
worldwide that marks the end of Ramadan, the Islamic holy month of fasting
(sawm). The religious Eid is the first and only day in the month of Shawwal
during which Muslims are not permitted to fast. The holiday celebrates the
conclusion of the 29 or 30 days of dawn-to-sunset fasting during the entire
month of Ramadan. The day of Eid, therefore, falls on the first day of the month
of Shawwal. The date for the start of any lunar Hijri month varies based on the
observation of new moon by local religious authorities, so the exact day of
celebration varies by locality.

Eid al-Fitr has a particular Salat (Islamic prayer) consisting of two Rakats
(units) and generally offered in an open field or large hall. It may be
performed only in congregation (Jama’at) and has an additional extra six Takbirs
(raising of the hands to the ears while saying "Allāhu Akbar", literally "God is
great"), three of them in the beginning of the first raka'ah and three of them
just before Ruku' in the second raka'ah in the Hanafi school of Sunni Islam.
Other Sunni schools usually have twelve Takbirs, seven in the first, and five at
the beginning of the second raka'ah. This Eid al-Fitr salat is, depending on
which juristic opinion is followed, Fard فرض (obligatory), Mustahabb مستحب
(strongly recommended, just short of obligatory) or mandoob مندوب (preferable).

Muslims believe that they are commanded by Allah, as mentioned in the Quran, to
continue their fast until the last day of Ramadan and pay the Zakat and fitra
before offering the Eid prayers.

Traditionally, it is the day (beginning at sunset) of the first sighting of the
crescent moon shortly after sunset. If the moon is not observed immediately
after the 29th day of the previous lunar month (either because clouds block its
view or because the western sky is still too bright when the moon sets), then it
is the following day.

Eid al-Fitr was originated by the Islamic prophet Muhammad. It is observed on
the first of the month of Shawwal at the end of the month of Ramadan, during
which Muslims undergo a period of fasting.

According to certain traditions, these festivals were initiated in Medina after
the migration of Muhammad from Mecca. Anas reports:

Eid al-Fitr is celebrated for one, two or three days. Common greetings during
this holiday are the Arabic greeting ‘Eid Mubārak ("Blessed Eid") or ‘Eid Sa‘īd
("Happy Eid"). In addition, many countries have their own greetings in the local
language – in Turkey, for example, a typical saying might be Bayramınız kutlu
olsun or "May your Bayram – Eid – be blessed." Muslims are also encouraged on
this day to forgive and forget any differences with others or animosities that
may have occurred during the year.

Typically, practising Muslims wake up early in the morning—always before
sunrise—offer Salatul Fajr (the pre-sunrise prayer), and in keeping with the
traditions of the Prophet Muhammad clean their teeth with a toothbrush, take a
shower before prayers, put on new clothes (or the best available), and apply
perfume.

It is forbidden to fast on the Day of Eid. It is customary to acknowledge this
with a small sweet breakfast, preferably of date (fruit), before attending a
special Eid prayer (known as salaat).

As an obligatory act of charity, money is paid to the poor and the needy
(Arabic: Zakat-ul-fitr) before performing the ‘Eid prayer. The following list
contains some general rituals:

The Eid prayer is performed in congregation in open areas like fields, community
centres, etc. or at mosques. No call to prayer is given for this Eid prayer, and
it consists of only two units of prayer with an additional six incantations. The
Eid prayer is followed by the sermon and then a supplication asking for Allah's
forgiveness, mercy, peace and blessings for all living beings across the world.
The sermon also instructs Muslims as to the performance of rituals of Eid, such
as the zakat. Listening to the sermon at Eid is not required and is optional, a
Sunnah i.e. while the sermon is being delivered. After the prayers, Muslims
visit their relatives, friends and acquaintances or hold large communal
celebrations in homes, community centres or rented halls.

Eid gifts, known as Eidi, are frequently given at eid to children and immediate
relatives.

Eid al-Fitr marks the end of the fasting month of Ramadan. This has to do with
the communal aspects of the fast, which expresses many of the basic values of
the Muslim community; e.g., empathy for the poor, charity, worship,
steadfastness, patience etc. Fasting is also believed by some scholars to extol
fundamental distinctions, lauding the power of the spiritual realm, while
acknowledging the subordination of the physical realm. It also teaches a Muslim
to stay away from worldly desires and to focus entirely on the Lord and thank
Him for his blessings. It is a rejuvenation of the religion and it creates a
stronger bond between the Muslim and his Lord.

In the major cities of Saudi Arabia, every night there are huge fireworks shows.

In Iran at the last days of month of Ramadan, several expert group by
representation of office of Ayatollah Khamenei go to the different zones of the
country. They determined Eid al-Fitr if the new moon's crescent as sign of
starting of each lunar month in Islamic calendar is seen and confirmed by these
groups. Iranian Muslims celebrate the first day of month of Shawwal as the Eid
al-Fitr that the fasting month end. They take part in Eid al-Fitr special prayer
that generally advance in an open field or a large hall with congregation in
attendance and pay the Zakat al-Fitr. The Eid al-Fitr prayer had been led by
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Supreme Leader of Iran of Iran at Tehran's Imam Khomeini
Grand Prayer Grounds (Mossalla) and he discourses the sermon after the prayer.
Also in Iran there are usually one or two days as national holiday marking the
celebrating.

In Turkey, nationwide celebrated holidays are referred to as bayram, and Eid
al-Fitr is referred to as both Şeker Bayramı ("Bayram of Sweets") and Ramazan
Bayramı ("Ramadan Bayram").

It is a public holiday, where schools and government offices are generally
closed for the entire three-day period of the celebrations. The celebrations of
this bayram are infused with national traditions. It is customary for people to
greet one another with Bayramınız kutlu olsun ("May your bayram be blessed") or
Bayramınız mübarek olsun ("May your bayram be blessed"). Mutlu Bayramlar ("Happy
Bayram") is an alternative phrase for celebrating this bayram. It is a time for
people to attend prayer services, put on their best clothes (referred to as
bayramlık, often purchased just for the occasion), visit all their loved ones
(such as relatives, neighbours, and friends), and pay their respects to the
deceased with organised visits to cemeteries, where large, temporary bazaars of
flowers, water (for watering the plants adorning a grave), and prayer books are
set up for the three-day occasion. The first day of the bayram is generally
regarded as the most important, with all members of the family waking up early,
and the men going to their neighbourhood mosques for the special bayram prayer.

It is regarded as especially important to honour elderly citizens by kissing
their right hand and placing it on one's forehead while wishing them bayram
greetings. It is also customary for young children to go around their
neighbourhood, door to door, and wish everyone a "Happy Bayram", for which they
are awarded candy, chocolates, traditional sweets such as baklava and Turkish
Delight, or a small amount of money at every door, similar to the Hallowe'en
custom in the United States.

Municipalities all around the country organise fund-raising events for the poor,
in addition to public shows such as concerts or more traditional forms of
entertainment such as the Karagöz and Hacivat shadow-theatre and even
performances by the Mehter – a Janissary Band founded during the days of the
Ottoman Empire.

Eid al-Fitr is a three-day feast and an official holiday in Egypt with vacations
for schools, universities and government offices. Some stores and restaurants
are also closed during Eid.

Children are normally given new clothes to wear throughout the Eid. Also, women
(particularly mothers, wives, sisters and daughters) are commonly given special
gifts by their loved ones. It is customary for children to also receive a
Eid-ey-yah from their adult relatives. This is a small sum of money that the
children receive and is used to spend on all their activities throughout the
Eid. Children will wear their new clothes and go out to amusement parks, gardens
or public courtyards based on how much their Eidyah affords. The amusement parks
can range from the huge ones on the outskirts of Cairo-Nile, Felucca Nile rides
is one common feature of Eid celebration in Egyptian villages, towns and cities.

The families gatherings involve cooking and eating all kinds of Egyptian food
like Fata, but the items most associated with Eid al-Fitr are Ka'ak (singular =
Kahka), which are cookies filled with nuts and covered with powdered sugar.
Egyptians either bake it at home or buy it in the bakery. Thus, a bakery crowded
in the last few days of Ramadan with Kahk buyers is a common scene. TV in Egypt
celebrates Eid too, with a continuous marathon of movies as well as programmes
featuring live interviews from all over Egypt of both public figures and
everyday citizens, sharing their Eid celebrations.

Egyptians like to celebrate with others so the streets are always crowded during
the days and nights of Eid.

There are several accounts of a heightened number of sexual assaults and rapes
taking place during the festival in 2006 in Egypt, some noting as well the
precautions being taken to prevent a recurrence of such problems. Subsequent
reports indicate that this phenomenon continues to cause concern, one Egyptian
journalist writes, 'The Eid al-Fitr holiday following this year's Ramadan
brought its usual share of sexual harassment'. Operation Anti Sexual Harassment,
an Egyptian organisation founded to protect against sexual assaults, described
Eid al-Fitr as a "season for harassment", and the prevalence of such attacks 'a
trend that has become associated with Eid al-Fitr celebrations in recent years'.
In 2013 allegations also surfaced in Cairo and Tanta. Public discussion has been
reported to be difficult. 2014 saw lower rates of attempted harassment, and
activists reported more confidence since amendment of the penal code. 141 police
reports for harassment were filed in Cairo in 2015, though it was claimed many
reports were withdrawn. 2016 saw a reduction to 120 complaints and 35 arrests
for harassment, many women however felt it necessary to take precautions.

Edward Lane also alludes to a problem with 'intrigues' with females of a
different kind around Eid al Fitr, in the early 19th century.

In Africa, Eid is celebrated by Muslims in various areas, particularly in North
Africa, the Horn of Africa and the Sahel, where Islam is adhered to by many.

Since 2012, Tunisia sees three days of celebration, with only 2 days as a
national holiday (1st Eid and second Eid), with preparations starting several
days earlier. Special biscuits are made to give to friends and relatives on the
day, including Baklawa and several kinds of "ka'ak". Men will go to the mosque
early in the morning, while the women will either go with them or stay in and
prepare for the celebration by putting together new outfits and toys for their
children, as well as a big family lunch generally held at one of the parents'
homes. During the daylight hours, there may be dancing and music, but the
feasting lasts all day long, and many gifts are a large part of tradition. Also,
food is the centre of this holiday, so this is one of the highlights of the
evening.

In Somalia and other Islamic parts of the Horn region, Eid al-Fitr is observed
by the Muslim communities. Celebrations marking the event are typically
accompanied by elaborate banquets, where special dishes such as xalwo (halwo)
and buskut (buskuit) are served.

In Cape Town, hundreds of Muslims will gather at Green Point in the evening of
the last day of Ramadan each year for the sighting of the moon. The gathering
brings together people from all walks of life, and everyone comes with something
to share with others at the time of breaking the fast. The Maghrib (sunset)
prayer is then performed in congregation and the formal moon-sighting results
are announced thereafter.

The festival of Eid al-Fitr is celebrated by first attending the mosque in the
morning for Eid prayer. This is followed by visiting relatives and neighbours.
Children receive presents and money from elder members of the family, relatives
and neighbours. Most people wear new clothes with bright colours, while
biscuits, cakes, samosas, pies and tarts are presented to visitors as treats.
Lunch is usually served in family groups. It is also customary to exchange
gifts.

In Sudan, where 97% of the population is Muslim, preparations for Eid begin the
last couple of days in Ramadan. For days, ka'ak (sugar powdered cookies),
bettifour (dry baked goods including dainty biscuits, baked meringues and
macaroons – whose name are derived from the French petit four) and popcorn are
baked in large batches to serve to guests and to give to family and friends;
dressy Eid clothes are either shopped for or sewn; girls and women decorate
their hands and feet with henna; and parts of the house may even be painted. The
night before Eid, the whole household partakes in cleaning the house and yard
and setting out the finest bedsheets, table cloths, and decorations. On the day
of Eid, men and boys (and occasionally women and girls) will attend the Eid
prayer. For the next 3 days, families will then partake in visiting each other,
extended family, neighbours, and close friends. In these short visits, the baked
goods, chocolates and sweets are served, and often large lunches are prepared
for the visiting well-wishers. Children are given gifts, either in the form of
toys or money.

Nigeria is officially a secular country populated by large numbers of Muslims
and Christians. Eid is popularly known as "Small Sallah" in Nigeria and people
generally greet each other with the traditional greeting: "Barka Da Sallah",
which means "Greetings on Sallah" in the Hausa language. Muslims observe their
Eid prayers at designated praying grounds before heading home to partake in
festive meals, generally prepared by the women of the household. The Federal
holiday typically lasts for two days in Nigeria.

In the predominantly Sunni Muslim culture of Afghanistan, Eid al-Fitr holds
significant importance and is celebrated widely for three days. The most common
greeting is Eid Mubarak (Blessed Eid). This Eid among the Pashto-speaking
community is called Kochnai Akhtar.

Afghans start preparing for the Eid al-Fitr festival up to ten days prior by
cleaning up their homes. The practice is called Khana Takani in Dari. Afghans
visit their local bazaars to buy new clothes, sweets and snacks. Special treats
served to guests during the festivities during Eid are: Jelabi (Jalebi),
Shor-Nakhod (made with chickpeas), and Cake wa Kolcha (a simple cake, similar to
pound cake).

On the day of Eid al-Fitr, Afghans will first offer their Eid prayers and then
gather in their homes with their families, greeting one another by saying "Eid
Mubarak" and usually adding "Eidet Mobarak Roza wa Namazet Qabool Dakhel Hajiha
wa Ghaziha," which means "Happy Eid to you; may your fasting and prayers be
accepted by Allah, and may you be counted among those who will go to the
Hajj-pilgrimage." Family elders will give money and gifts to children. It is
also common practice to visit families and friends, which may be difficult to do
at other times of the year. Children walk from home to home saying "Khala Eidet
Mubarak" ("aunt happy Eid"), and they receive cookies or Pala.

For Eid prayer, people gather at large open areas like sports grounds, parks or
large open area. After Eid Salat people meet and greet each other with
traditional hug of friendship and the greeting "Eid Mubarak". Before going home
people give charity to needy and the poor, to further make it possible to have
everybody be able to enjoy the day. On their way home, people buy sweets, gas
balloons for kids, and gifts for the family. At home family members enjoy
special Eid breakfast with various types of sweets and desserts, including
traditional dessert sheer khurma, which is made of vermicelli, milk, butter, dry
fruits and dates, etc.

Eid is mainly enjoyed by the kids, as they mostly receive money in cash called
"Eidi" as gift by every elder in the family and relatives when they visit their
places. On Eid day kids are allowed to spend their gift money (Eidi) as they
want. Media also cover Eid festivities all day and air various special
programmes on TV for all age groups.

Celebrations in India and the rest of the Indian subcontinent share many
similarities with regional variations, because a large part of the Indian
subcontinent was ruled as one nation during the days of the Mughal Empire and
British Raj. The night before Eid is called Chaand Raat, which means, "Night of
the Moon". Muslims in these countries will often visit bazaars and shopping
malls with their families for Eid shopping. Women, especially younger girls,
often apply the traditional Mehndi, or henna, on their hands and feet and wear
colourful bangles.

The traditional Eid greeting is Eid Mubarak, and it is frequently followed by a
formal embrace. Gifts are frequently given—new clothes are part of the
tradition—and it is also common for children to be given small sums of money
(Eidi) by their elders. It is common for children to offer salam to parents and
adult relatives.

After the Eid prayers, it is common for some families to visit graveyards and
pray for the salvation of departed family members. It is also common to visit
neighbours, family members, friends and to get together to share sweets, snacks
and special meals including some special dishes that are prepared specifically
on Eid. Special celebratory dishes in India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh include
Lachcha/লাচ্চা or sivayyan/শিমাই, a dish of fine, toasted sweet vermicelli
noodles with milk and dried fruit (see Sheer khurma).

On Eid day before prayers, people distribute a charity locally known as fitra.
Many people also avail themselves of this opportunity to distribute zakat, an
Islamic obligatory alms tax of 2.5% of one's annual savings, to the needy. Zakat
is often distributed in the form of food and new clothes.

In India, there are many popular places for Muslims to congregate to perform Eid
prayers at this time include the Jama Masjid in Delhi, Mecca Masjid in
Hyderabad, Aishbagh Idgah in Lucknow, Red Road and Nakhoda Masjid in Kolkata,
Taj-ul Masjid in Bhopal, Jama Mosque in Mumbai, Hajratbal Mosque in Kashmir.
Muslims turn out in the thousands, as there is a lot of excitement surrounding
the celebration of this festival. It is common for some Hindus to visit their
Muslim friends and neighbours on Eid to convey their greetings.

Idul Fitri or Hari Raya Aidilfitri is a public holiday in Indonesia, Malaysia,
Singapore and Brunei. The customs and rituals of Eid al-Fitr are quite similar
across Indonesia, Malaysia, Brunei, Singapore, the Philippines, Southern
Thailand and Cambodia.

Eid is known in Indonesia as Hari Raya Idul Fitri (or more popularly as Lebaran)
and is a national holiday. Shopping malls and bazaars are usually filled with
people to get things for Lebaran such as; new clothes, shoes, sandals, and even
food to serve days ahead of Idul Fitri, which creates a distinctively festive
atmosphere throughout the country, along with traffic mayhem. Many banks,
government and private offices are closed for the duration of the Lebaran
festivities.

Lebaran represents one of the largest temporary human migrations globally, as
workers particularly return to their home town or city to celebrate with their
families and to ask forgiveness from parents, in-laws, and other elders. In 2013
about 30 million Indonesians travelled to their hometowns during the Lebaran
holiday. This is known in Indonesia as mudik (go to udik, literally means:
source area) or pulang kampung (homecoming). It is an annual tradition that
people observe in big cities such as Greater Jakarta, Surabaya, or elsewhere in
Indonesia. The government of Indonesia provides additional transportation to
handle the huge amount of travelers. However, the impact is still tremendous as
millions of cars and motorcycles jam the roads and highways, causing extensive
traffic jams each year.

The night before Idul Fitri is called takbiran, it is filled with the sounds of
many muezzin chanting the takbir in the mosques or musallahs, while often people
fill the street also chanting takbir. In many parts of Indonesia, especially in
the rural areas, obor (torches) and damar/pelita (oil lamps) are lit up and
placed outside and around homes. Also, during takbiran, people usually light
various firecrackers or fireworks.

On the Lebaran day, after performing Eid prayer in the morning, people dressed
in their new or best clothes will gather to greet their family and neighbours.
It is common to greet people with "Selamat Idul Fitri" which means "Happy Eid".
Muslims also greet one another with "mohon maaf lahir dan batin", which
literally means "Please forgive (me) outwardly and internally", because Idul
Fitri is not only for celebrations but also a time for atonement to ask for
forgiveness for sins which they may have committed but were cleansed as a result
of the fasting in the Muslim month of Ramadan. During this Eid morning to
afternoon, the zakat alms for the poor are usually distributed in the mosques.

Families usually will have special Lebaran meal; special dishes will be served
such as ketupat, opor ayam, rendang, sambal goreng ati, sayur lodeh and lemang
(a type of glutinous rice cake cooked in bamboo). Various types of kue, cookies
and dodol sweet delicacies are also served during this day. Younger families
usually visit their older neighbours or relatives to wish and greet them a Happy
Eid also to ask for forgiveness. Idul Fitri is a very joyous day for children as
adults give them money in colourful envelopes.

It is customary for Muslim-Indonesians to wear traditional cultural clothing on
Eid al-Fitr. The Indonesian male outfit is known as baju koko: a collarless long
or short-sleeve shirt with traditional embroidered designs with a "kilt" sarung
of songket, ikat or similar woven, plaid-cloth, and a headwear known as songkok.
Alternatively, men may wear either Western-style business suits or more
traditional loose-fitting trousers with colour-matched shirts, and either a peci
hat. Traditional female dress is known as kebaya kurung. It consists of,
normally, a loose-fitting kebaya blouse (which may be enhanced with brocade and
embroidery), a long skirt both of which may be batik, or the sarung skirt made
of batik, ikat or songket and either the jilbab (hijab) or its variant the
stiffened kerudung.

Later, it is common for Muslims in Indonesia to visit the graves of loved ones.
During this visit, they will clean the grave, recite Ya-Seen, a chapter (sura)
from the Quran and also perform the tahlil ceremony. Muslims also visit the
living in a special ritual called halal bi-halal. This could be done during or
several days after Idul Fitri. Individuals and families go to visit elder
relatives, close family and neighbours during the first day of Idul Fitri, to
honor them and ask forgiveness. They continue to pay respects to further
relatives in the next day, and colleagues in days to weeks later after they get
back to work. They will also seek reconciliation (if needed), and preserve or
restore harmonious relations. The rest of the day is spent visiting relatives or
serving visitors in a festive, joyful atmosphere.

In Malaysia, Singapore, and Brunei, Eid is more commonly known as Hari Raya
Aidilfitri (Jawi: هاري راي عيدالفطري), Hari Raya Idul Fitri, Hari Raya Puasa,
Hari Raya Fitrah or Hari Lebaran. Hari Raya means 'Celebration Day'.

It is customary for workers in the city to return to their home town to
celebrate with their families and to ask forgiveness from parents, in-laws, and
other elders. This is known in Malaysia as balik kampung (homecoming).

The night before Idul Fitri is filled with the sounds of many muezzin chanting
the takbir in the mosques or musallahs. In many parts of Malaysia, especially in
the rural areas, pelita or panjut or lampu colok (as known by
Malay-Singaporeans) (oil lamps, similar to tiki torches) are lit up and placed
outside and around homes. Special dishes like ketupat, rendang, lemang (a type
of glutinous rice cake cooked in bamboo) and other Malay also Nyonya delicacies
such as various kuih-muih are served during this day. It is common to greet
people with "Salam Aidilfitri" or "Selamat Hari Raya" which means "Happy Eid".
Muslims also greet one another with "maaf zahir dan batin", which means "Forgive
my physical and emotional (wrongdoings)".

It is customary for Muslim-Malaysians to wear a traditional cultural clothing on
Eid al-Fitr. The Malay variant (worn in Malaysia, Singapore, Brunei and Southern
Thailand) is known as the Baju Melayu, shirt worn with a sarong known as kain
samping or songket and a headwear known as songkok. Malaysian women's clothing
is referred to as Baju Kurung and baju kebaya. It is a common practice however
for the Malays in Singapore and Johor, Malaysia to refer to the baju kurung in
reference to the type of outfit, worn by both men and women.

In Malaysia, especially in the major cities, people take turns to set aside a
time for open house when they stay at home to receive and entertain neighbours,
family and other visitors. It is common to see non-Muslims made welcome during
Eid at these open houses. They also celebrate by lighting traditional bamboo
cannon firecrackers known as meriam buluh, using kerosene in large hollow bamboo
tubes or Chinese imported crackers. The traditional bamboo cannon, meriam bambu,
and fireworks are notoriously loud and can be very dangerous to operator,
bystander and even nearby buildings. These are usually bamboo tubes 5–10 cm
(2.0–3.9 in) in diameter and 4–7 m (13–23 ft) long, filled with either: water
and several hundred grams of calcium carbide, or heated kerosene, then ignited
by match.

In Malaysia, children are given token sums of money, also known as "duit raya",
from their parents or elders.

In the Philippines, Eid al-Fitr, known to the Christian majority and other
non-Muslims as "Wakás ng Ramadán" ("End of Ramadan") or incorrectly as
"Ramadan", has been recognised by the Philippine Government as a regular holiday
by virtue of Republic Act No. 9177 and it is also according to Presidential
Proclamation No. 1083, signed into law on 13 November 2002 – the only majority
Christian country worldwide to have done so.

The law was enacted in deference to the Filipino Muslim community and to promote
peace and harmony among major religions in the country. The first national
commemoration of Eid al-Fitr was on 6 December 2002, marked by prayers and
feasting. Some Filipino Muslims attend grand congregations at the Manila Golden
Mosque and the Quirino Grandstand every Eid, while Muslim-majority communities
in Mindanao stage large public celebrations.

Eid al-Fitar lasts for only one day among Burmese Muslims, who call the day Eid
Nei’ (Nei’=day) or Eid Ka Lay (Ka Lay=small) or Shai Mai Eid (Shai Mai=a meal of
sweet vermicelli served with fried cashews, coconut shreds, raisins, and milk
that is traditionally eaten by Burmese Muslims during Eid). Burmese Muslims
predominantly follow the Hanafi school of jurisprudence in Sunni Islam.

During Ramadan, in the small towns and big villages with significant Muslim
populations, Burmese Muslim youth organise singing teams called Jago (in Urdu
and Hindi), which means "wake up". Jago teams usually do not use musical
instruments apart from the occasional use of harmonica mouth organs. These
youths will walk throughout the neighbourhoods before sunrise to wake up the
fellow Muslims for Suhoor (pre-dawn meal), which precedes the day of fasting.

The roving groups of singers will take the tunes of popular Hindi movie songs,
replaced with Burmese lyrics and invocations about fasting, the do's and don'ts
of Islam and about the benefits of Salaat. These songs could also be called
Qawwali, which are popular in India and Pakistan. Sometimes these Jago groups
will also visit Muslim homes on the Eid day, where they are welcomed with food
and monetary donations for the team with Eidi or Duit Raya.

Although Eid al-Fitr is not a public holiday in Burma, most employers have an
understanding of the festival and are usually willing to accommodate days off
for Muslim staff. Some may even take time off during office hours to visit with
Muslim staff at their homes, usually accompanied by other non-Muslim co –
workers. As there is no single Islamic authority in Burma to make official
decisions on moon-sighting, it is sometimes difficult to reach consensus on the
start and end of Ramadan. This often results in Eid being celebrated on
different days in small towns and villages.

The Eid al-Adha "Festival of Sacrifice" or "Greater Eid" is a public holiday in
Burma as this event falls annually on the 10th day of the month of Dhu al-Hijjah
(ذو الحجة) in the lunar Islamic calendar. Unlike Muslim countries that observe a
three-day festival, Eid al-Adha is only observed on one day in Burma. During
both Eids, the traditional greeting is merely the common Islamic greeting of
Assalamualaikum, and Eid Mubarak is only seldom heard. The greeting is followed
by placing the right hand on the forehead (as if giving a salute); there is no
shaking of hands and rarely only includes a formal embrace.

In the People's Republic of China, out of 56 officially recognised ethnic
groups, Eid al-Fitr is celebrated by at least 10 ethnic groups that are
predominantly Muslim. These groups are said to total 18 million according to
official statistics, but some observers say the actual number may be much
higher. It is also a public holiday in China in certain regions, including two
Province Prefecture Level regions, Ningxia and Xinjiang. All residents in these
areas, regardless of religion, are entitled to either a one-day or three-day
official holiday. Outside the Muslim-majority regions, only Muslims are entitled
to a one-day holiday. In Xinjiang province, Eid al-Fitr is even celebrated by
Han Chinese population during which holiday supplies of mutton, lamb and beef
are distributed to households as part of welfare programme funded by government
agencies, public and private institutions, and businesses.

In Yunnan, Muslim populations are spread throughout the region. On Eid al-Fitr,
however, some devotees may travel to Sayyid 'Ajjal's grave after their communal
prayers. There, they will conduct readings from the Quran and clean the tomb,
reminiscent of the historic annual Chinese Qingming festival, in which people go
to their ancestors' graves, sweep and clean the area and make food offerings.

Finally the accomplishments of the Sayyid 'Ajall will be related in story form,
concluded by a special prayer service to honour the hundreds of thousands of
Muslims killed during the Panthay Rebellion, and the hundreds killed during the
Cultural Revolution.

Eid al-Fitr (i.e. Seker Bayram, Sugar Feast) is celebrated in Greece mainly in
the Western Thrace region from the local Muslim minority (Turks, Pomaks and
Roma), along with the other two major celebrations, Kurban Bayram (Sacrifice
Feast) and Hıdırellez. On the day of the Bayram, family gathers together, wears
its best clothes, and celebrate with a common meal, after having attend the
morning prayer. The women prepare and offer sweets to family and visitors, while
small children go around and pay their respects to the elderly, by kissing their
hands, and they in turn reward them with caddies, sweets, and small amount of
money. Local Muslim shopkeepers close their shops this day, while Muslim
minority schools have a 5-day holiday for the feast. Some entertainment venues
and clubs hold special events for the night of the Bayram.

In Australia, a predominantly secular country, Muslims are able to practise
their religion with great freedom. Most large companies[citation needed] allow
for special religious holidays allowing Muslims to take a day off for Eid
al-Fitr. Areas where there are large (but not necessarily majority) Muslim
populations have overflowing attendances at the mosque for the Eid al-Fitr
prayer. Police frequently block off roads and divert traffic to cater for the
prayer and subsequent festivities. Eid prayers are also held in open areas
(playground, stadium) in some places.

In 1987, The Australian MEFF Consortium commenced the Multicultural Eid Festival
and Fair to celebrate Eid in Sydney, held shortly after Eid al-Fitr. The
festival has grown to now cater for tens of thousands of Muslims and non-Muslims
and has included as guests Yusuf Islam, famous Australian rugby player, Hazem El
Masri, the then governor-general of Australia, Michael Jeffery and the previous
premier of New South Wales, Kristina Keneally. This festival has now been
replicated in cities all around Australia. The biggest Eid fair in Melbourne is
held in Broadmeadows usually on the weekend following the Eid day. In Canberra,
the capital of Australia, Eid Festival sponsored by Australian Federal Police
(AFP) is held on the Sunday after the Eid day. The festival includes stalls from
different nations, cultural programme, and rides for kids and adults.

In New York City alternate side parking (street cleaning) regulations are
suspended. Beginning in 2016, New York City Public Schools will also remain
closed on Eid. In Houston, Texas, the annual prayers are offered at the George
R. Brown Convention Center in downtown Houston, organised by the Islamic Society
of Greater Houston (ISGH).

The United States Postal Service (USPS) has issued several Eid postage stamps,
across several years – starting in 2001 – honoring "two of the most important
festivals in the Islamic calendar: Eid al-Fitr and Eid al-Adha." Eid stamps were
released in 2001–2002, 2006–2009, and a Forever® stamp in 2011.

For Eid al-Fitr, just as in the United States, most Canadian Muslims will take a
day off from work and go to prayers held in big-city mosques or Islamic centres,
convention halls or sports arenas. Muslims from different cultures with
multi-national customs get together for prayers and celebrations. In the larger
cities of Toronto, Montreal, Vancouver, Calgary and Ottawa, congregational
prayers may be done at multiple times to accommodate the large number of
attendees. Many Muslims will visit each other's homes on the Eid day or the days
following to attend designated "open houses" in which everyone is welcome to
visit. Children receive gifts or money, and sweets and tasty dishes are served
throughout the day. Smaller Muslim communities, particularly in the rural areas,
hold other communal gatherings in mosques or rented community halls. Muslims
also donate money or contribute to their local food banks on this day for those
who are less fortunate.

During the morning, observant men usually wear a thawb, jubba or sherwani, and
women usually wear a salwar kameez, abaya or any other traditional clothing.
Generally speaking, men, women and children will wear their best clothes. They
will then proceed to a local mosque, community centre or park (in the summer
months) for the Eid prayer. During the journey to the mosque, and up until the
start of the prayer, it is Islamic tradition to recite takbeer – a reminder that
God is Greater. Immediately after the Eid prayer and sermon have finished,
people greet each other with "Eid Mubarak," or the equivalent in their
mother-tongue. Some men may go to a local cemetery after Eid prayers to remember
the deceased and pray for them. When they return home they will congratulate
family and friends and other Muslims, before having breakfast together of
traditional sweet and savoury treats. Gifts and money are usually given to
children.

Throughout the day, everyone will either visit or host friends and relatives,
sharing some of the traditional foods with them. Bangladeshi dishes and
Pakistani dishes such as samosas, Siweya, Rice and Handesh, Noonor Bora, and
Fulab are particularly popular within those communities. Other communities enjoy
a range of traditional foods too.

As in Egypt, there have been a small number of reports of sexual assaults
associated with the Eid in the UK.

Muslims comprise around 7% (63,000 people) of the total population of Fiji, a
small tropical island-nation northeast of Australia. The Muslim community mostly
consists of people of Indian origin, descendants of indentured labourers who
were brought to the islands in the late 19th and early 20th centuries by the
British colonists. Although no accurate statistical evidence exists, there are
also thought to be a few hundred indigenous Fijian Muslims (Melanesians) in the
island nation. The vast majority of Muslims in Fiji are of the Sunni branch of
Islam who follow the Hanafi school of jurisprudence.

The day of Eid al-Fitr is celebrated in Fiji with Muslim men wearing their best
clothes and attending the mosque for the early morning congregational prayer
(women do not go to the mosques for prayers in most parts of Fiji). This is
followed by visiting relatives and neighbours. Children receive presents and
money from elder members of the family, relatives and neighbours. Most Muslims
will wear new clothes on this day, and serve samai, a dish of fine, sweet
vermicelli noodles mixed in warm milk. This is usually accompanied by samosas,
curried chicken and beef as well as sweets and Indian snacks for guests visiting
throughout the day.

The traditional Eid greeting is Eid Mubarak, and it is frequently followed by a
formal embrace.

Although the date of Eid al-Fitr is always the same in the Islamic calendar, the
date in the Gregorian calendar falls approximately 11 days earlier each
successive year, since the Islamic calendar is lunar and the Gregorian calendar
is solar. Hence if the Eid falls in the first ten days of a Gregorian calendar
year, there will be a second Eid in the last ten days of the same Gregorian
calendar year. The Gregorian date may vary between countries depending on the
local sightability of the new moon. Some expatriate Muslim communities follow
the dates as determined for their home country, while others follow the local
dates of their country of residence.

The following table shows predicted dates and announced dates based on new moon
sightings for Saudi Arabia.

There are two Rak'ah (Rakaat) performed in the Eid al-Fitr prayer. The prayer of
Eid al-Fitr starts by doing "Niyyat" for the prayer and then Takbeer (Allahu
Akbar) is said by the Imam and all the followers. The next is to recite
"Takbeer-e-Tehreema" in first Rakaat. Then the congregation says Allahu Akbar
seven times, every time raising hands to the ears and dropping them except the
last time when hands are folded. Then the Imam reads the Surah-e-Fatiha and
other Surah. Then the congregation performs Ruku and Sujud as in other prayers.
This completes the first Rak’ah. Then the congregation rises up from the first
Rak'ah and folds hands for the second Rak’ah. In the next step the Imam says
five takbirat, followed by the congregation, every time raising the hands to the
ears and dropping them except the last time when the hands are folded. Again the
Imam reads the Surah-e-Fatiha and another Surah followed by the Ruku and Sujud.
This completes the Eid prayer. After the prayer there is a khutbah.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Suicide_Squad_(film)

Suicide Squad is a 2016 American superhero film based on the DC Comics antihero
team of the same name. It is the third installment in the DC Extended Universe.
The film is written and directed by David Ayer and stars an ensemble cast
consisting of Will Smith, Jared Leto, Margot Robbie, Joel Kinnaman, Viola Davis,
Jai Courtney, Jay Hernandez, Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje, Ike Barinholtz, Scott
Eastwood, and Cara Delevingne. In Suicide Squad, a secret government agency led
by Amanda Waller recruits imprisoned supervillains to execute dangerous black
ops missions and save the world from a powerful threat, in exchange for leaner
sentences. By February 2009, a Suicide Squad film was in development at Warner
Bros. Pictures. Ayer signed on to write and direct in September 2014, and by
October, the casting process had begun. Principal photography began on April 13,
2015, in Toronto, Ontario, with additional filming in Chicago, Illinois, and
ended in August that year.

Suicide Squad premiered in New York City on August 1, 2016, and was released in
the United States on August 5, 2016, in 2D, 3D and IMAX 3D. Following a strong
debut that set new box office records, the film grossed over $745 million
worldwide, making it the tenth highest-grossing film of 2016. It received
generally negative reviews from critics, who criticized the plot, directing and
characters, though Robbie and Leto's performances received praise. The film has
been nominated for and won multiple awards across various categories, including
hair and make-up, acting, and music.

In the aftermath of Superman's death, intelligence officer Amanda Waller
assembles Task Force X, a team of dangerous criminals imprisoned at Belle Reve
Prison consisting of elite hitman Deadshot, former psychiatrist Harley Quinn,
pyrokinetic ex-gangster El Diablo, opportunistic thief Captain Boomerang,
genetic mutation Killer Croc, and specialized assassin Slipknot. They are placed
under command of Colonel Rick Flag to be used as disposable assets in high-risk
missions for the United States government. Each member has a nano bomb implanted
in their neck, designed to detonate should any member rebel or try to escape.

One of Waller's intended recruits is Flag's girlfriend Dr. June Moone, an
archaeologist possessed by a witch-goddess known as the "Enchantress".
Enchantress quickly turns on Waller, deciding to eradicate humankind with a
mystical weapon for imprisoning her. She besieges Midway City by transforming
its populace into a horde of monsters, and summons her brother Incubus to assist
her. Waller then deploys the squad to extract a high-profile mark from Midway,
which is reported to be under a terrorist attack.

Harley's homicidal lover, the Joker, finds out about her predicament and
tortures Belle Reve Security Officer Griggs into leading him to the facility
where the nano bombs are made. There, he blackmails Dr. Van Criss into disabling
Harley's bomb. On approach, the squad's helicopter is shot down, forcing them to
proceed on foot to their target. Boomerang inaccurately convinces Slipknot that
the bombs are a ruse to keep them in check; Slipknot attempts to escape and Flag
kills him via his nano bomb, while the squad is attacked by Enchantress'
minions. They eventually manage to fight their way through to a safe room, where
they learn that their mark is Waller herself, who is attempting to cover up her
involvement in Enchantress' siege.

The squad escorts Waller to a rooftop for extraction, but the arriving
helicopter has been hijacked by the Joker and his men, who open fire on the
squad while Harley climbs aboard upon Dr. Van Criss disarming the bomb. However,
Waller's men shoot down the helicopter, and Harley falls out while the Joker is
presumed dead, after which Harley rejoins the squad. Alerted to Waller's
whereabouts, Enchantress' minions arrive and kidnap her. Deadshot finds Waller's
confidential files and learns the truth about Enchantress. Flag is then forced
to confess the truth, causing the squad members to abandon him. With Waller
compromised, Flag relieves the squad of the mission, but chooses to continue.
Realizing they have an opportunity to prove themselves, they soon rejoin him and
locate Enchantress at a partially-flooded subway station. Killer Croc and a
group of Navy SEALs, led by Lieutenant GQ Edwards, go underwater to plant a bomb
underneath Incubus. El Diablo embraces his abilities and manages to distract
Incubus long enough for the bomb to detonate underneath, killing them both as
well as Edwards.

The remaining squad members battle Enchantress together, but are ultimately
defeated. Enchantress offers to fulfill their deepest desires in exchange for
their allegiance, and Harley feigns interest in order to get close enough to cut
out Enchantress' heart. Killer Croc then throws explosives into Enchantress'
weapon and Deadshot shoots them, destroying the device. Flag takes Enchantress'
heart and crushes it, finally freeing June from the curse. Waller, still alive,
emerges, and the squad members are returned to Belle Reve with ten years off
their sentences. All but Captain Boomerang are allowed special privileges. The
Joker, alive and unscathed, breaks into the penitentiary and rescues Harley. In
a mid-credits scene, Waller meets with Bruce Wayne, who agrees to protect her
from the backlash against her role in Enchantress' rampage in exchange for
access to the government's files on the expanding metahuman community.

Ben Affleck and Ezra Miller reprise their roles from Batman v Superman: Dawn of
Justice as Bruce Wayne / Batman and Barry Allen / Flash, respectively in cameo
roles; Jason Momoa makes a brief photographic appearance as Arthur Curry /
Aquaman. Alain Chanoine portrays Incubus, the brother of Enchantress, who
possesses the body of a businessman in Midway City. Jim Parrack and Common
appear as the Joker's henchmen Jonny Frost and Monster T, respectively. David
Harbour, Alex Meraz and Matt Baram portray government official Dexter Tolliver,
Navy SEAL Gomez and Dr. Van Criss, respectively. Shailyn Pierre-Dixon and Corina
Calderon are featured as Zoe Lawton and Grace Santana, Deadshot's daughter and
Diablo's wife, respectively. David Ayer (writer/director of the film) makes a
cameo appearance as a Belle Reve officer.

The film was announced in 2009 with Dan Lin as producer. Stephen Gilchrist as
co-producer and Justin Marks as the screenwriter. David Ayer signed on to direct
and write the film in September 2014. later describing the film to Empire Online
as "Dirty Dozen with supervillains". Ayer had six weeks to write his script,
given the release date was already set.

In October 2014, Warner Bros. had initially offered Ryan Gosling, Tom Hardy,
Margot Robbie, and Will Smith roles in the film. In November, TheWrap revealed
that Jared Leto was in talks for the role of Joker, which Gosling was originally
sought for. The main cast was announced by Warner Brothers in December 2014 with
Smith, Hardy, Leto, Robbie, Jai Courtney, and Cara Delevingne as Deadshot, Rick
Flag, Joker, Harley Quinn, Captain Boomerang, and Enchantress, respectively. The
studio was also considering Viola Davis, Octavia Spencer, and Oprah Winfrey for
the role of Amanda Waller. Following the announcement of the cast, comic book
writer John Ostrander (creator of the modern incarnation of the Suicide Squad)
talked with Comic Book Resources about the casting, saying, "I have no problem
with the casting... what I am really impressed by with all of the casting is
that they are getting some very good actors to play these parts."

In January 2015, Davis expressed interest in playing Amanda Waller during an
interview, saying "I'm fascinated by her (Waller)." Meanwhile, Tom Hardy had to
drop out as Rick Flag because of scheduling issues with his film The Revenant.
Jake Gyllenhaal was then given an offer to replace Hardy as Flag, but he
declined. The studio was then looking at Joel Edgerton, Jon Bernthal, and Joel
Kinnaman to play the role. In February, Jay Hernandez joined the cast and
Kinnaman was also confirmed to play Flag. At the 87th Academy Awards, Davis
confirmed that she had been cast as Amanda Waller. In March 2015, boxer Raymond
Olubawale was reported to have an unspecified role in the film, and Scott
Eastwood announced that he had been cast on Twitter. Later that month, it was
confirmed that Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje and Karen Fukuhara had been cast as
Killer Croc and Katana, respectively. Adam Beach, Ike Barinholtz, and Jim
Parrack were added to the cast in April 2015. In January 2016, Ben Affleck was
confirmed to reprise his role as Batman from Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice.

Filming began on April 13, 2015. On April 26 and 27, filming was to take place
at the Hy's Steakhouse. A "snowstorm" scene was filmed on April 29 on the
Adelaide St. and in Ching Lane. On May 5, a few major scenes were filmed in
downtown Toronto next to Yonge and Dundas Square. Principal photography wrapped
in August 2015 after additional filming took place in Chicago, Illinois.
Additional filming ensued in 2016 following Warner's desire to make a more
lighthearted and comedic tone akin to the trailers, especially as Batman v.
Superman: Dawn of Justice was criticized for being too somber. It was also
confirmed that Zack Snyder filmed the Flash scene. Ayer confirmed that the film
was completed on June 24, 2016. Despite the involvement of multiple editors in
the process, only John Gilroy is credited. It was later revealed that many of
Jared Leto's scenes were omitted from the final cut. An interview with Leto
revealed that he was upset over the removal of his work.

Academy Award-winning composer Steven Price, who previously worked with Ayer on
Fury, composed the score for Suicide Squad. Suicide Squad: Original Motion
Picture Score was announced for a release date of August 8, 2016. A soundtrack
album for the film, titled Suicide Squad: The Album, was announced in June 2016,
and released on August 5, 2016. The album's first single, "Heathens" by Twenty
One Pilots, was released on June 20, 2016. A music video for the song, set in a
prison and featuring footage from the film, was released on June 21. "Sucker for
Pain" was released as the second single on June 24. The album's third single,
"Purple Lamborghini" by Skrillex and Rick Ross, was released on July 22.
"Gangsta" by Kehlani, "Standing in the Rain" by Action Bronson, Mark Ronson and
Dan Auerbach of The Black Keys, "Medieval Warfare" by Grimes, and a cover of
Queen's "Bohemian Rhapsody" performed by Panic! at the Disco, were released as
four promotional singles on August 2, August 3, and 4, 2016, respectively, with
"Medieval Warfare" and "Bohemian Rhapsody" being released on the same day.

Suicide Squad held a panel at the 2015 San Diego Comic-Con International, with
stars Smith, Robbie, Courtney, Davis, and Kinnaman amongst those who appeared. A
trailer intended to be exclusive to the event premiered, but was leaked online,
with Warner Bros. responding by stating they would not release an official
version. However, the following day, Warner Bros. released an official version,
stating: "Warner Bros. Pictures and our anti-piracy team have worked tirelessly
over the last 48 hours to contain the Suicide Squad footage that was pirated
from Hall H on Saturday. We have been unable to achieve that goal. Today we will
release the same footage that has been illegally circulating on the web, in the
form it was created and high quality with which it was intended to be enjoyed.
We regret this decision as it was our intention to keep the footage as a unique
experience for the Comic-Con crowd, but we cannot continue to allow the film to
be represented by the poor quality of the pirated footage stolen from our
presentation."

Suicide Squad premiered at the Beacon Theatre in New York City on August 1,
2016. It was theatrically released in the United States on August 5, 2016, in
2D, 3D and IMAX 3D.

Suicide Squad was a box office success, grossing $325.1 million in North America
and $420.5 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $745.6 million,
against a budget of $175 million ($325 million including advertising and
promotion costs). Suicide Squad was highly anticipated by audiences worldwide,
despite the negative critical reception and lower-than-expected box office
performance of Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice in March. It recorded a
worldwide opening of $267.1 million from 59 countries and IMAX global debut of
$18.2 million, both set new records for the month of August. That is also the
second-best debut worldwide for a DC property after Dawn of Justice ($422.5
million) and the seventh best for a superhero title. The Hollywood Reporter
highlighted that Dawn of Justice had an advantage of receiving a coveted
day-and-date release with China, while Suicide Squad did not secure a release
date in the country. Forbes pointed out that had the film secured a release in
China, it may well have matched/topped the $773 million total of Guardians of
the Galaxy and the $782 million gross of Deadpool.

Projections for its opening weekend in the United States and Canada were being
continuously revised upwards starting from $100 million to as high as $150
million. The film opened across 4,255 theaters, the widest for the month of
August. Of that, 382 theaters were in IMAX, over 490 large-format screens
locations, 270+ drive-ins, 180+ D-Box locations and over 200 dine-in/luxury
theaters. Suicide Squad is the biggest pre-sale for an August film, according to
reports from ticket selling website, Fandango. It opened Friday, August 5, 2016,
on about 11,000 screens and earned $65.1 million, marking the biggest August
opening and single day, and the third biggest opening day gross of 2016. Of
that, $5.8 million came from IMAX theaters, also a new August record. This
includes $20.5 million it earned from Thursday previews, which began at 6:00pm,
setting the record for biggest-ever preview of August and the second biggest for
a non-sequel film (behind Man of Steel). IMAX comprised $2.4 million (12%) of
that figure. Much like Batman v Superman and The Dark Knight Rises, however, the
film saw a steep Friday-to-Saturday decline, grossing $38.8 million (a drop of
41%). In total, it earned $133.7 million in its opening weekend, setting records
for the month of August, previously held by Guardians of the Galaxy and for Will
Smith's career (I Am Legend). It is also the second-biggest debut ever for a
non-sequel, behind The Hunger Games ($152 million), the fourth biggest of the
year and the fifth biggest for Warner Bros. IMAX made up $11 million of the
opening numbers from 382 theaters, just $200,000 shy of breaking Guardians of
the Galaxy' record. Nevertheless, it did beat Guardians' $7.6 million in terms
of premium large format screens which comprised $13 million. For Cinemark XD
screens, which made $3.2 million, the sixth-highest opening ever.

The opening numbers helped Warner Bros. push past the $1 billion mark in North
America for the sixteenth year in a row. The film also helped the total weekend
tickets sales to an unprecedented $221.3 million in August. Previously, August
has never exceeded $200 million at the box office in a single weekend in North
America. Suicide Squad scored a massive debut primarily on the backs of the
under-35 set which made up 76% of the opening weekend. Audiences were also
diverse with African-American making up 41% of the patrons.

Following its record breaking opening weekend, it posted the biggest August
Monday gross with $13.1 million, a drop of 56.5% from its Sunday gross. This
broke Guardians of the Galaxy's previous record of $11.7 million, and also the
biggest August Tuesday with $14.3 million, up 9% from its Monday take. The film
has now earned the biggest Friday, Saturday, Sunday, Monday and Tuesday in
August history. It made $179.1 million in its first week of release, the fourth
biggest of the year. Despite earning $13.4 million on its second Friday, the
film dropped 79%, slightly less than Batman v Superman's 81% drop. Following a
first-place finish in its first weekend of release, the film faced a steep
decline of 67.2% in its second weekend, earning an estimated $43.8 million to
score the biggest August second weekend gross. It also passed the $200 million
mark in just ten days and was able to hold the top spot for the second time in a
row despite competition from the comedy Sausage Party. However, the drop is
among one of the biggest decline for a studio superhero film, and for Warner
Bros. which The Hollywood Reporter called it "deja vu all over again" after
Batman v Superman tumbled 69% in its second weekend earlier in the year. The
second weekend decline is the second biggest in summer history, only behind
Warcraft's historic 70% drop in June of the same year. The site also highlighted
possible reasons for the significantly steep drop: dismal reviews, general
apathy among moviegoers, altering movie-going habits and competition.

Despite an influx of heavy competition (from both holdovers and new comers),
Suicide Squad managed to top the box office for the third weekend in a row, an
achievement shared in 2016 only by Deadpool, Zootopia, The Jungle Book and
Finding Dory. It fell by 52.1%, earning $20.9 million. The third weekend drop is
the second-best hold among all the live-action superhero release of 2016. Only
Deadpool had a lower third weekend percentage drop with 44.9% drop. The fall was
also better than the likes of other superhero films of 2016 such as Batman v
Superman (-54.5%), Captain America: Civil War (-54%) and X-Men: Apocalypse
(-56%). After three weeks of holding the top spot, it was finally overtaken by
Don't Breathe on its fourth weekend. It maintained the second spot in its fifth
weekend and registered its best hold with only a -20% decline while also passing
the $300 million threshold on its thirty-second day of release. It remained in
the top ten for eight weekends until finally falling off in its ninth weekend.

Internationally, Suicide Squad secured a release in approximately 62 countries
with no China on the slate. It was released in 57 countries (70% of the
marketplace) in conjuncture with its North American debut, including France,
South Korea, Australia, Russia and the CIS, Brazil, the United Kingdom, Republic
of Ireland, Spain and Mexico beginning from Wednesday, August 3. According to
trackings, the film was projected to have an opening anywhere between $85
million to $120 million, which would be a new August international debut record.
Deadline.com pointed out that although the film is a lesser known property,
similar to Guardians of the Galaxy, stars such as Will Smith are better known
internationally, which could potentially aid the film's performance. It opened
Wednesday, August 3, 2016, in 7 countries, earning $8.1 million. It opened in 50
more countries on August 4 and 5, earning $53.8 million for a three-day total of
$64.6 million from 57 countries. Through Sunday, August 7, it delivered a
five-day opening of $133.3 million from 57 countries on 17,630 screens, nearly
double the previous August record held by Guardians of the Galaxy. It also set
IMAX opening record with $7 million. It added $58.7 million on its second
weekend, a drop of 57% on 15,600 screens in 62 territories. After two straight
wins, it was overtaken by the animated The Secret Life of Pets in its third
weekend.

It recorded the biggest opening day of all time for Warner Bros. in Russia ($3.9
million), the biggest August opening day in the United Kingdom and Ireland ($6.2
million), Brazil ($3 million), South Korea ($2.9 million, also the second
biggest Warner Bros. opening day), France ($2.7 million), Sweden ($564,000) and
Holland ($517,000, also the biggest opening of the year). Mexico and Spain
opened with $3.9 million and $1.4 million respectively. In terms of opening
weekend, the film recorded the biggest Warner Bros. opening of all time in
Russia ($11.4 million). In Brazil, despite playing amidst the 2016 Summer
Olympics, it managed to open with $11.75 million, marking the biggest August
opening weekend of all time, the biggest Will Smith opening, and the fourth
biggest opening for a superhero film. Its opening numbers alone made it the
second biggest film for the studio there. In South Korea, although the film was
off to a strong start, however, it was eventually overtaken by The Last Princess
and Operation Chromite debuting at No. 3. It made $10.8 million in five days
(Wednesday to Sunday). The U.K. and Ireland posted the biggest opening market
for the film with £11.25 million ($14.8 million) from 573 theaters. Discounting
previews, it delivered the third-biggest UK opening of the year, behind Batman v
Superman: Dawn of Justice (£14.62 million) and Captain America: Civil War
(£14.47 million). It also became the first new released film of August since
2014 to debut above £3 million. Elsewhere, it scored the biggest August opening
in Australia ($10.5 million), Mexico ($10.4 million) and Argentina ($2.5
million), while in Spain, it recorded the biggest DC opening with $3.4 million,
where it was behind The Secret Life of Pets for the weekend and France a $7.9
million opening. It opened in first place in India for a non-local film with
$1.8 million from 462 screens, despite facing competition from Jason Bourne
($1.1 million from 1,027 screens) which also opened on the same weekend. Despite
the later film occupying twice the screen number of the former, Suicide Squad
managed to take the top spot. Italy opened with an estimated $2.2 million in two
days, that's the biggest opening for Smith there. It opened in first place in
Germany with $6.9 million. It opened in Japan – the film's last market – on
September 9 where it debuted with $3.8 million there. It finished in second spot
(and first among new releases) behind local anime Your Name. With such a robust
opening, Variety projects that the film will end it's run there around $20
million. It has so far grossed $9.4 million there.

In terms of total earnings, it biggest market outside of North America are the
U.K. and Ireland ($43.3 million), followed by Brazil ($35.1 million) and Mexico
($27.1 million). In just two weeks, it became the second highest-grossing Warner
Bros. film of all time in Brazil behind Dawn of Justice.

Suicide Squad received generally negative reviews from critics. On Rotten
Tomatoes, the film has a rating of 26%, based on 301 reviews, with a weighted
average score of 4.7/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Suicide Squad
boasts a talented cast and a little more humor than previous DCEU efforts, but
they aren't enough to save the disappointing end result from a muddled plot,
thinly written characters, and choppy directing." On Metacritic, the film has a
normalized score of 40 out of 100, based on 53 critics, indicating "mixed or
average reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade
of "B+" on an A+ to F scale.

Rolling Stone's Peter Travers wrote, "DC Comics tries something different with
Suicide Squad, an all-star collection of crime fighting villains—and the result
is anything but super." Richard Lawson of Vanity Fair said, "Suicide Squad is
just bad. It's ugly and boring, a toxic combination that means the film's highly
fetishized violence doesn't even have the exciting tingle of the wicked or the
taboo." Writing for The Wall Street Journal, Joe Morgenstern heavily criticized
the film saying, "In a word, Suicide Squad is trash. In two words, it's ugly
trash." He further said, it "amounts to an all-out attack on the whole idea of
entertainment," and called the film a product of "shameless pandering".

Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly gave the film B− saying, "Suicide Squad
kicks off with fizzy, punk-rock ferocity before turning flat and spiraling into
familiar formulas," and called Jared Leto's "scene-stealing" Joker "wasted" and
"stranded in the periphery". He concluded by saying, "For DC, Suicide Squad is a
small step forward. But it could have been a giant leap." IGN gave the film
5.9/10, saying: "Suicide Squad is a decidedly different flavor than Batman v
Superman. It goes for subversive, funny and stylish, and it succeeds wildly
during the first act. But then the movie turns into something predictable and
unexciting." Drew McWeeny from HitFix gave it a positive review, writing
"Suicide Squad is not the darkest mainstream superhero comic book movie ever
made, nor is it even the darkest live-action film featuring Batman ever made.
However, it is gleefully nihilistic, and it takes a different approach to what
has become a fairly familiar story form at this point, right at the moment when
it feels like superhero movies either have to evolve or die." Brian Truitt from
USA Today wrote, "Compared to its ilk, Suicide Squad is an excellently quirky,
proudly raised middle finger to the staid superhero-movie establishment."

Jared Leto and Margot Robbie's performances as the Joker and Harley Quinn,
respectively, were better received, with many critics eager to see more of the
characters in future films.

The home video release of Suicide Squad was released on Digital HD on November
15, 2016, and on Blu-ray, 4K Ultra-HD Blu-Ray, Blu-Ray 3D, and DVD on December
13, 2016. An extended cut of the film is included in the home entertainment
release, containing roughly thirteen minutes of footage absent from the
theatrical version.

In March 2016, it was announced that Warner Bros. would bring Ayer and Smith
back for a sequel, to be shot in 2017. The following month, Ayer expressed an
interest in making the sequel R-rated. Fukuhara has stated that she wants to
explore Katana's backstory in the sequel, and Courtney has stated about his
hopes of reprising his role as well.

In addition, it was later announced in September that Warner Bros. was planning
a film focusing on Harleen Quinzel / Harley Quinn, with Robbie serving as
executive producer and Christina Hodson serving as the screenwriter for the solo
film. In December 2016, The Hollywood Reporter stated that Ayer was in
discussion to direct Gotham City Sirens, a film based on Harley Quinn and other
female villains. That same month, it was also revealed that the studio is
looking to produce a solo film focusing on Floyd Lawton / Deadshot, which would
potentially star Smith.

In February 2017, it was reported that the studio had a shortlist of potential
directors for the sequel.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_Declaration_of_Independence

The Declaration of Independence is the statement adopted by the Second
Continental Congress meeting at the Pennsylvania State House (Independence Hall)
in Philadelphia on July 4, 1776, which announced that the thirteen American
colonies, then at war with the Kingdom of Great Britain, regarded themselves as
thirteen newly independent sovereign states, and no longer under British rule.
Instead they formed a new nation—the United States of America. John Adams was a
leader in pushing for independence, which was passed on July 2 with no opposing
vote cast. A committee of five had already drafted the formal declaration, to be
ready when Congress voted on independence. The term "Declaration of
Independence" is not used in the document itself.

John Adams persuaded the committee to select Thomas Jefferson to compose the
original draft of the document, which Congress would edit to produce the final
version. The Declaration was ultimately a formal explanation of why Congress had
voted on July 2 to declare independence from Great Britain, more than a year
after the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War. The next day, John Adams
wrote to his wife Abigail: "The Second Day of July 1776, will be the most
memorable Epocha, in the History of America." But Independence Day is actually
celebrated on July 4, the date that the Declaration of Independence was
approved.

After ratifying the text on July 4, Congress issued the Declaration of
Independence in several forms. It was initially published as the printed Dunlap
broadside that was widely distributed and read to the public. The source copy
used for this printing has been lost, and may have been a copy in Thomas
Jefferson's hand. Jefferson's original draft, complete with changes made by John
Adams and Benjamin Franklin, and Jefferson's notes of changes made by Congress,
are preserved at the Library of Congress. The best known version of the
Declaration, a signed copy that is popularly regarded as the official document,
is displayed at the National Archives in Washington, D.C. This engrossed copy
was ordered by Congress on July 19, and signed primarily on August 2.

The sources and interpretation of the Declaration have been the subject of much
scholarly inquiry. The Declaration justified the independence of the United
States by listing colonial grievances against King George III, and by asserting
certain natural and legal rights, including a right of revolution. Having served
its original purpose in announcing independence, references to the text of the
Declaration were few in the following years. Abraham Lincoln made it the
centerpiece of his rhetoric (as in the Gettysburg Address of 1863), and his
policies. Since then, it has become a well-known statement on human rights,
particularly its second sentence:

This has been called "one of the best-known sentences in the English language",
containing "the most potent and consequential words in American history". The
passage came to represent a moral standard to which the United States should
strive. This view was notably promoted by Abraham Lincoln, who considered the
Declaration to be the foundation of his political philosophy, and argued that
the Declaration is a statement of principles through which the United States
Constitution should be interpreted.

The United States Declaration of Independence inspired many other similar
documents in other countries, with its ideas gaining adherence in the Low
Countries, as well as in the Caribbean, Spanish America, the Balkans, West
Africa, and Central Europe in the decades up to 1848.

By the time that the Declaration of Independence was adopted in July 1776, the
Thirteen Colonies and Great Britain had been at war for more than a year.
Relations had been deteriorating between the colonies and the mother country
since 1763. Parliament enacted a series of measures to increase revenue from the
colonies, such as the Stamp Act of 1765 and the Townshend Acts of 1767.
Parliament believed that these acts were a legitimate means of having the
colonies pay their fair share of the costs to keep them in the British Empire.

Many colonists, however, had developed a different conception of the empire. The
colonies were not directly represented in Parliament, and colonists argued that
Parliament had no right to levy taxes upon them. This tax dispute was part of a
larger divergence between British and American interpretations of the British
Constitution and the extent of Parliament's authority in the colonies. The
orthodox British view, dating from the Glorious Revolution of 1688, was that
Parliament was the supreme authority throughout the empire, and so, by
definition, anything that Parliament did was constitutional. In the colonies,
however, the idea had developed that the British Constitution recognized certain
fundamental rights that no government could violate, not even Parliament. After
the Townshend Acts, some essayists even began to question whether Parliament had
any legitimate jurisdiction in the colonies at all. Anticipating the arrangement
of the British Commonwealth, by 1774 American writers such as Samuel Adams,
James Wilson, and Thomas Jefferson were arguing that Parliament was the
legislature of Great Britain only, and that the colonies, which had their own
legislatures, were connected to the rest of the empire only through their
allegiance to the Crown.

The issue of Parliament's authority in the colonies became a crisis after
Parliament passed the Coercive Acts (known as the Intolerable Acts in the
colonies) in 1774 to punish the Province of Massachusetts for the Boston Tea
Party of 1773. Many colonists saw the Coercive Acts as a violation of the
British Constitution and thus a threat to the liberties of all of British
America. In September 1774, the First Continental Congress convened in
Philadelphia to coordinate a response. Congress organized a boycott of British
goods and petitioned the king for repeal of the acts. These measures were
unsuccessful because King George and the ministry of Prime Minister Lord North
were determined not to retreat on the question of parliamentary supremacy. As
the king wrote to North in November 1774, "blows must decide whether they are to
be subject to this country or independent".

Most colonists still hoped for reconciliation with Great Britain, even after
fighting began in the American Revolutionary War at Lexington and Concord in
April 1775. The Second Continental Congress convened at the Pennsylvania State
House in Philadelphia in May 1775, and some delegates hoped for eventual
independence, but no one yet advocated declaring it. Many colonists no longer
believed that Parliament had any sovereignty over them, yet they still professed
loyalty to King George, who they hoped would intercede on their behalf. They
were disappointed in late 1775, when the king rejected Congress's second
petition, issued a Proclamation of Rebellion, and announced before Parliament on
October 26 that he was considering "friendly offers of foreign assistance" to
suppress the rebellion. A pro-American minority in Parliament warned that the
government was driving the colonists toward independence.

Thomas Paine's pamphlet Common Sense was published in January 1776, just as it
became clear in the colonies that the king was not inclined to act as a
conciliator. Paine had only recently arrived in the colonies from England, and
he argued in favor of colonial independence, advocating republicanism as an
alternative to monarchy and hereditary rule. Common Sense introduced no new
ideas and probably had little direct effect on Congress's thinking about
independence; its importance was in stimulating public debate on a topic that
few had previously dared to openly discuss. Public support for separation from
Great Britain steadily increased after the publication of Paine's enormously
popular pamphlet.

Some colonists still held out hope for reconciliation, but developments in early
1776 further strengthened public support for independence. In February 1776,
colonists learned of Parliament's passage of the Prohibitory Act, which
established a blockade of American ports and declared American ships to be enemy
vessels. John Adams, a strong supporter of independence, believed that
Parliament had effectively declared American independence before Congress had
been able to. Adams labeled the Prohibitory Act the "Act of Independency",
calling it "a compleat Dismemberment of the British Empire". Support for
declaring independence grew even more when it was confirmed that King George had
hired German mercenaries to use against his American subjects.

Despite this growing popular support for independence, Congress lacked the clear
authority to declare it. Delegates had been elected to Congress by thirteen
different governments, which included extralegal conventions, ad hoc committees,
and elected assemblies, and they were bound by the instructions given to them.
Regardless of their personal opinions, delegates could not vote to declare
independence unless their instructions permitted such an action. Several
colonies, in fact, expressly prohibited their delegates from taking any steps
towards separation from Great Britain, while other delegations had instructions
that were ambiguous on the issue. As public sentiment grew for separation from
Great Britain, advocates of independence sought to have the Congressional
instructions revised. For Congress to declare independence, a majority of
delegations would need authorization to vote for independence, and at least one
colonial government would need to specifically instruct (or grant permission
for) its delegation to propose a declaration of independence in Congress.
Between April and July 1776, a "complex political war" was waged to bring this
about.

In the campaign to revise Congressional instructions, many Americans formally
expressed their support for separation from Great Britain in what were
effectively state and local declarations of independence. Historian Pauline
Maier identifies more than ninety such declarations that were issued throughout
the Thirteen Colonies from April to July 1776. These "declarations" took a
variety of forms. Some were formal written instructions for Congressional
delegations, such as the Halifax Resolves of April 12, with which North Carolina
became the first colony to explicitly authorize its delegates to vote for
independence. Others were legislative acts that officially ended British rule in
individual colonies, such as the Rhode Island legislature declaring its
independence from Great Britain on May 4, the first colony to do so. Many
"declarations" were resolutions adopted at town or county meetings that offered
support for independence. A few came in the form of jury instructions, such as
the statement issued on April 23, 1776 by Chief Justice William Henry Drayton of
South Carolina: "the law of the land authorizes me to declare...that George the
Third, King of Great Britain...has no authority over us, and we owe no obedience
to him." Most of these declarations are now obscure, having been overshadowed by
the declaration approved by Congress on July 2, and signed July 4.

Some colonies held back from endorsing independence. Resistance was centered in
the middle colonies of New York, New Jersey, Maryland, Pennsylvania, and
Delaware. Advocates of independence saw Pennsylvania as the key; if that colony
could be converted to the pro-independence cause, it was believed that the
others would follow. On May 1, however, opponents of independence retained
control of the Pennsylvania Assembly in a special election that had focused on
the question of independence. In response, Congress passed a resolution on May
10 which had been promoted by John Adams and Richard Henry Lee, calling on
colonies without a "government sufficient to the exigencies of their affairs" to
adopt new governments. The resolution passed unanimously, and was even supported
by Pennsylvania's John Dickinson, the leader of the anti-independence faction in
Congress, who believed that it did not apply to his colony.

As was the custom, Congress appointed a committee to draft a preamble to explain
the purpose of the resolution. John Adams wrote the preamble, which stated that
because King George had rejected reconciliation and was hiring foreign
mercenaries to use against the colonies, "it is necessary that the exercise of
every kind of authority under the said crown should be totally suppressed".
Adams's preamble was meant to encourage the overthrow of the governments of
Pennsylvania and Maryland, which were still under proprietary governance.
Congress passed the preamble on May 15 after several days of debate, but four of
the middle colonies voted against it, and the Maryland delegation walked out in
protest. Adams regarded his May 15 preamble effectively as an American
declaration of independence, although a formal declaration would still have to
be made.

On the same day that Congress passed Adams's radical preamble, the Virginia
Convention set the stage for a formal Congressional declaration of independence.
On May 15, the Convention instructed Virginia's congressional delegation "to
propose to that respectable body to declare the United Colonies free and
independent States, absolved from all allegiance to, or dependence upon, the
Crown or Parliament of Great Britain". In accordance with those instructions,
Richard Henry Lee of Virginia presented a three-part resolution to Congress on
June 7. The motion was seconded by John Adams, calling on Congress to declare
independence, form foreign alliances, and prepare a plan of colonial
confederation. The part of the resolution relating to declaring independence
read:

Lee's resolution met with resistance in the ensuing debate. Opponents of the
resolution conceded that reconciliation was unlikely with Great Britain, while
arguing that declaring independence was premature, and that securing foreign aid
should take priority. Advocates of the resolution countered that foreign
governments would not intervene in an internal British struggle, and so a formal
declaration of independence was needed before foreign aid was possible. All
Congress needed to do, they insisted, was to "declare a fact which already
exists". Delegates from Pennsylvania, Delaware, New Jersey, Maryland, and New
York were still not yet authorized to vote for independence, however, and some
of them threatened to leave Congress if the resolution were adopted. Congress,
therefore, voted on June 10 to postpone further discussion of Lee's resolution
for three weeks. Until then, Congress decided that a committee should prepare a
document announcing and explaining independence in the event that Lee's
resolution was approved when it was brought up again in July.

Support for a Congressional declaration of independence was consolidated in the
final weeks of June 1776. On June 14, the Connecticut Assembly instructed its
delegates to propose independence and, the following day, the legislatures of
New Hampshire and Delaware authorized their delegates to declare independence.
In Pennsylvania, political struggles ended with the dissolution of the colonial
assembly, and a new Conference of Committees under Thomas McKean authorized
Pennsylvania's delegates to declare independence on June 18. The Provincial
Congress of New Jersey had been governing the province since January 1776; they
resolved on June 15 that Royal Governor William Franklin was "an enemy to the
liberties of this country" and had him arrested. On June 21, they chose new
delegates to Congress and empowered them to join in a declaration of
independence.

Only Maryland and New York had yet to authorize independence towards the end of
June. Previously, Maryland's delegates had walked out when the Continental
Congress adopted Adams's radical May 15 preamble, and had sent to the Annapolis
Convention for instructions. On May 20, the Annapolis Convention rejected
Adams's preamble, instructing its delegates to remain against independence. But
Samuel Chase went to Maryland and, thanks to local resolutions in favor of
independence, was able to get the Annapolis Convention to change its mind on
June 28. Only the New York delegates were unable to get revised instructions.
When Congress had been considering the resolution of independence on June 8, the
New York Provincial Congress told the delegates to wait. But on June 30, the
Provincial Congress evacuated New York as British forces approached, and would
not convene again until July 10. This meant that New York's delegates would not
be authorized to declare independence until after Congress had made its
decision.

While political maneuvering was setting the stage for an official declaration of
independence, a document was being written to explain the decision. On June 11,
1776, Congress appointed a "Committee of Five" to draft a declaration,
consisting of John Adams of Massachusetts, Benjamin Franklin of Pennsylvania,
Thomas Jefferson of Virginia, Robert R. Livingston of New York, and Roger
Sherman of Connecticut. The committee left no minutes, so there is some
uncertainty about how the drafting process proceeded; contradictory accounts
were written many years later by Jefferson and Adams, and they are not entirely
reliable—although frequently cited. What is certain is that the committee
discussed the general outline that the document should follow, and decided that
Jefferson would write the first draft. The committee in general, and Jefferson
in particular, thought that Adams should write the document, but Adams persuaded
the committee to choose Jefferson and promised to consult with him personally.
Considering Congress's busy schedule, Jefferson probably had limited time for
writing over the next seventeen days, and likely wrote the draft quickly. He
then consulted the others and made some changes, and then produced another copy
incorporating these alterations. The committee presented this copy to the
Congress on June 28, 1776. The title of the document was "A Declaration by the
Representatives of the United States of America, in General Congress assembled."

Congress ordered that the draft "lie on the table". For two days, Congress
methodically edited Jefferson's primary document, shortening it by a fourth,
removing unnecessary wording, and improving sentence structure. Congress removed
Jefferson's assertion that Britain had forced slavery on the colonies, in order
to moderate the document and appease persons in Britain who supported the
Revolution.[citation needed] Jefferson wrote that Congress had "mangled" his
draft version, but the Declaration that was finally produced was "the majestic
document that inspired both contemporaries and posterity," in the words of his
biographer John Ferling.

On Monday, July 1, having tabled the draft of the declaration, Congress resolved
itself into a committee of the whole, with Benjamin Harrison of Virginia
presiding, and resumed debate on Lee's resolution of independence. John
Dickinson made one last effort to delay the decision, arguing that Congress
should not declare independence without first securing a foreign alliance and
finalizing the Articles of Confederation. John Adams gave a speech in reply to
Dickinson, restating the case for an immediate declaration.

A vote was taken after a long day of speeches. As always, each colony cast a
single vote; the delegation for each colony numbered from two to seven members,
and each delegation voted amongst themselves to determine the colony's vote.
Pennsylvania and South Carolina voted against declaring independence. The New
York delegation abstained, lacking permission to vote for independence. Delaware
cast no vote because the delegation was split between Thomas McKean (who voted
yes) and George Read (who voted no). The remaining nine delegations voted in
favor of independence, which meant that the resolution had been approved by the
committee of the whole. The next step was for the resolution to be voted upon by
the Congress itself. Edward Rutledge of South Carolina was opposed to Lee's
resolution but desirous of unanimity, and he moved that the vote be postponed
until the following day.

On July 2, South Carolina reversed its position and voted for independence. In
the Pennsylvania delegation, Dickinson and Robert Morris abstained, allowing the
delegation to vote three-to-two in favor of independence. The tie in the
Delaware delegation was broken by the timely arrival of Caesar Rodney, who voted
for independence. The New York delegation abstained once again, since they were
still not authorized to vote for independence, although they were allowed to do
so a week later by the New York Provincial Congress. The resolution of
independence had been adopted with twelve affirmative votes and one abstention.
With this, the colonies had officially severed political ties with Great
Britain. John Adams predicted in a famous letter, written to his wife on the
following day, that July 2 would become a great American holiday. Adams thought
that the vote for independence would be commemorated; he did not foresee that
Americans—including himself—would instead celebrate Independence Day on the date
that the announcement of that act was finalized.

The Declaration is not divided into formal sections; but it is often discussed
as consisting of five parts: Introduction, the Preamble, the Indictment of King
George, the Denunciation of the British people, and the Conclusion.

Historians have often sought to identify the sources that most influenced the
words and political philosophy of the Declaration of Independence. By
Jefferson's own admission, the Declaration contained no original ideas, but was
instead a statement of sentiments widely shared by supporters of the American
Revolution. As he explained in 1825:

Jefferson's most immediate sources were two documents written in June 1776: his
own draft of the preamble of the Constitution of Virginia, and George Mason's
draft of the Virginia Declaration of Rights. Ideas and phrases from both of
these documents appear in the Declaration of Independence. They were, in turn,
directly influenced by the 1689 English Declaration of Rights, which formally
ended the reign of King James II. During the American Revolution, Jefferson and
other Americans looked to the English Declaration of Rights as a model of how to
end the reign of an unjust king. The Scottish Declaration of Arbroath (1320) and
the Dutch Act of Abjuration (1581) have also been offered as models for
Jefferson's Declaration, but these models are now accepted by few scholars.

Jefferson wrote that a number of authors exerted a general influence on the
words of the Declaration. English political theorist John Locke is usually cited
as one of the primary influences, a man whom Jefferson called one of "the three
greatest men that have ever lived". In 1922, historian Carl L. Becker wrote,
"Most Americans had absorbed Locke's works as a kind of political gospel; and
the Declaration, in its form, in its phraseology, follows closely certain
sentences in Locke's second treatise on government." The extent of Locke's
influence on the American Revolution has been questioned by some subsequent
scholars, however. Historian Ray Forrest Harvey argued in 1937 for the dominant
influence of Swiss jurist Jean Jacques Burlamaqui, declaring that Jefferson and
Locke were at "two opposite poles" in their political philosophy, as evidenced
by Jefferson's use in the Declaration of Independence of the phrase "pursuit of
happiness" instead of "property". Other scholars emphasized the influence of
republicanism rather than Locke's classical liberalism. Historian Garry Wills
argued that Jefferson was influenced by the Scottish Enlightenment, particularly
Francis Hutcheson, rather than Locke, an interpretation that has been strongly
criticized.

Legal historian John Phillip Reid has written that the emphasis on the political
philosophy of the Declaration has been misplaced. The Declaration is not a
philosophical tract about natural rights, argues Reid, but is instead a legal
document—an indictment against King George for violating the constitutional
rights of the colonists. Historian David Armitage has argued that the
Declaration was strongly influenced by de Vattel's The Law of Nations, the
dominant international law treatise of the period, and a book that Benjamin
Franklin said was "continually in the hands of the members of our Congress".
Armitage writes, "Vattel made independence fundamental to his definition of
statehood"; therefore, the primary purpose of the Declaration was "to express
the international legal sovereignty of the United States". If the United States
were to have any hope of being recognized by the European powers, the American
revolutionaries first had to make it clear that they were no longer dependent on
Great Britain. The Declaration of Independence does not have the force of law
domestically, but nevertheless it may help to provide historical and legal
clarity about the Constitution and other laws.

The Declaration became official when Congress voted for it on July 4; signatures
of the delegates were not needed to make it official. The handwritten copy of
the Declaration of Independence that was signed by Congress is dated July 4,
1776. The signatures of fifty-six delegates are affixed; however, the exact date
when each person signed it has long been the subject of debate. Jefferson,
Franklin, and Adams all wrote that the Declaration had been signed by Congress
on July 4. But in 1796, signer Thomas McKean disputed that the Declaration had
been signed on July 4, pointing out that some signers were not then present,
including several who were not even elected to Congress until after that date.

The Declaration was transposed on paper, adopted by the Continental Congress,
and signed by John Hancock, President of the Congress, on July 4, 1776,
according to the 1911 record of events by the U.S. State Department under
Secretary Philander C. Knox. On August 2, 1776, a parchment paper copy of the
Declaration was signed by 56 persons. Many of these signers were not present
when the original Declaration was adopted on July 4. Signer Matthew Thornton
from New Hampshire was seated in the Continental Congress in November; he asked
for and received the privilege of adding his signature at that time, and signed
on November 4, 1776.

Historians have generally accepted McKean's version of events, arguing that the
famous signed version of the Declaration was created after July 19, and was not
signed by Congress until August 2, 1776. In 1986, legal historian Wilfred Ritz
argued that historians had misunderstood the primary documents and given too
much credence to McKean, who had not been present in Congress on July 4.
According to Ritz, about thirty-four delegates signed the Declaration on July 4,
and the others signed on or after August 2. Historians who reject a July 4
signing maintain that most delegates signed on August 2, and that those eventual
signers who were not present added their names later.

Two future U.S. presidents were among the signatories: Thomas Jefferson and John
Adams. The most famous signature on the engrossed copy is that of John Hancock,
who presumably signed first as President of Congress. Hancock's large,
flamboyant signature became iconic, and the term John Hancock emerged in the
United States as an informal synonym for "signature". A commonly circulated but
apocryphal account claims that, after Hancock signed, the delegate from
Massachusetts commented, "The British ministry can read that name without
spectacles." Another apocryphal report indicates that Hancock proudly declared,
"There! I guess King George will be able to read that!"

Various legends emerged years later about the signing of the Declaration, when
the document had become an important national symbol. In one famous story, John
Hancock supposedly said that Congress, having signed the Declaration, must now
"all hang together", and Benjamin Franklin replied: "Yes, we must indeed all
hang together, or most assuredly we shall all hang separately." The quotation
did not appear in print until more than fifty years after Franklin's death.

The Syng inkstand used at the signing was also used at the signing of the United
States Constitution in 1787.

After Congress approved the final wording of the Declaration on July 4, a
handwritten copy was sent a few blocks away to the printing shop of John Dunlap.
Through the night, Dunlap printed about 200 broadsides for distribution. Before
long, the Declaration was read to audiences and reprinted in newspapers
throughout the thirteen states. The first official public reading of the
document was by John Nixon in the yard of Independence Hall on July 8; public
readings also took place on that day in Trenton, New Jersey and Easton,
Pennsylvania. A German translation of the Declaration was published in
Philadelphia by July 9.

President of Congress John Hancock sent a broadside to General George
Washington, instructing him to have it proclaimed "at the Head of the Army in
the way you shall think it most proper". Washington had the Declaration read to
his troops in New York City on July 9, with thousands of British troops on ships
in the harbor. Washington and Congress hoped that the Declaration would inspire
the soldiers, and encourage others to join the army. After hearing the
Declaration, crowds in many cities tore down and destroyed signs or statues
representing royal authority. An equestrian statue of King George in New York
City was pulled down and the lead used to make musket balls.

British officials in North America sent copies of the Declaration to Great
Britain. It was published in British newspapers beginning in mid-August, it had
reached Florence and Warsaw by mid-September, and a German translation appeared
in Switzerland by October. The first copy of the Declaration sent to France got
lost, and the second copy arrived only in November 1776. It reached Portuguese
America by Brazilian medical student "Vendek" José Joaquim Maia e Barbalho, who
had met with Thomas Jefferson in Nîmes.

The Spanish-American authorities banned the circulation of the Declaration, but
it was widely transmitted and translated: by Venezuelan Manuel García de Sena,
by Colombian Miguel de Pombo, by Ecuadorian Vicente Rocafuerte, and by New
Englanders Richard Cleveland and William Shaler, who distributed the Declaration
and the United States Constitution among creoles in Chile and Indians in Mexico
in 1821. The North Ministry did not give an official answer to the Declaration,
but instead secretly commissioned pamphleteer John Lind to publish a response
entitled Answer to the Declaration of the American Congress. British Tories
denounced the signers of the Declaration for not applying the same principles of
"life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness" to African Americans. Thomas
Hutchinson, the former royal governor of Massachusetts, also published a
rebuttal. These pamphlets challenged various aspects of the Declaration.
Hutchinson argued that the American Revolution was the work of a few
conspirators who wanted independence from the outset, and who had finally
achieved it by inducing otherwise loyal colonists to rebel. Lind's pamphlet had
an anonymous attack on the concept of natural rights written by Jeremy Bentham,
an argument that he repeated during the French Revolution. Both pamphlets asked
how the American slaveholders in Congress could proclaim that "all men are
created equal" without freeing their own slaves.

William Whipple, a signer of the Declaration of Independence who had fought in
the war, freed his slave Prince Whipple because of revolutionary ideals. In the
postwar decades, other slaveholders also freed their slaves; from 1790 to 1810,
the percentage of free blacks in the Upper South increased to 8.3 percent from
less than one percent of the black population. All Northern states abolished
slavery by 1804.

The official copy of the Declaration of Independence was the one printed on July
4, 1776 under Jefferson's supervision. It was sent to the states and to the Army
and was widely reprinted in newspapers. The slightly different "engrossed copy"
(shown at the top of this article) was made later for members to sign. The
engrossed version is the one widely distributed in the 21st century. Note that
the opening lines differ between the two versions.

The copy of the Declaration that was signed by Congress is known as the
engrossed or parchment copy. It was probably engrossed (that is, carefully
handwritten) by clerk Timothy Matlack. A facsimile made in 1823 has become the
basis of most modern reproductions rather than the original because of poor
conservation of the engrossed copy through the 19th century. In 1921, custody of
the engrossed copy of the Declaration was transferred from the State Department
to the Library of Congress, along with the United States Constitution. After the
Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941, the documents were moved for
safekeeping to the United States Bullion Depository at Fort Knox in Kentucky,
where they were kept until 1944. In 1952, the engrossed Declaration was
transferred to the National Archives and is now on permanent display at the
National Archives in the "Rotunda for the Charters of Freedom".

The document signed by Congress and enshrined in the National Archives is
usually regarded as the Declaration of Independence, but historian Julian P.
Boyd argued that the Declaration, like Magna Carta, is not a single document.
Boyd considered the printed broadsides ordered by Congress to be official texts,
as well. The Declaration was first published as a broadside that was printed the
night of July 4 by John Dunlap of Philadelphia. Dunlap printed about 200
broadsides, of which 26 are known to survive. The 26th copy was discovered in
The National Archives in England in 2009.

In 1777, Congress commissioned Mary Katherine Goddard to print a new broadside
that listed the signers of the Declaration, unlike the Dunlap broadside. Nine
copies of the Goddard broadside are known to still exist. A variety of
broadsides printed by the states are also extant.

Several early handwritten copies and drafts of the Declaration have also been
preserved. Jefferson kept a four-page draft that late in life he called the
"original Rough draught". It is not known how many drafts Jefferson wrote prior
to this one, and how much of the text was contributed by other committee
members. In 1947, Boyd discovered a fragment of an earlier draft in Jefferson's
handwriting. Jefferson and Adams sent copies of the rough draft to friends, with
slight variations.

During the writing process, Jefferson showed the rough draft to Adams and
Franklin, and perhaps to other members of the drafting committee, who made a few
more changes. Franklin, for example, may have been responsible for changing
Jefferson's original phrase "We hold these truths to be sacred and undeniable"
to "We hold these truths to be self-evident". Jefferson incorporated these
changes into a copy that was submitted to Congress in the name of the committee.
The copy that was submitted to Congress on June 28 has been lost, and was
perhaps destroyed in the printing process, or destroyed during the debates in
accordance with Congress's secrecy rule.

The Declaration was neglected in the years immediately following the American
Revolution, having served its original purpose in announcing the independence of
the United States. Early celebrations of Independence Day largely ignored the
Declaration, as did early histories of the Revolution. The act of declaring
independence was considered important, whereas the text announcing that act
attracted little attention. The Declaration was rarely mentioned during the
debates about the United States Constitution, and its language was not
incorporated into that document. George Mason's draft of the Virginia
Declaration of Rights was more influential, and its language was echoed in state
constitutions and state bills of rights more often than Jefferson's words. "In
none of these documents", wrote Pauline Maier, "is there any evidence whatsoever
that the Declaration of Independence lived in men's minds as a classic statement
of American political principles."

Many leaders of the French Revolution admired the Declaration of Independence
but were also interested in the new American state constitutions. The
inspiration and content of the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and
Citizen (1789) emerged largely from the ideals of the American Revolution. Its
key drafts were prepared by Lafayette, working closely in Paris with his friend
Thomas Jefferson. It also borrowed language from George Mason's Virginia
Declaration of Rights. The declaration also influenced the Russian Empire. The
document had a particular impact on the Decembrist revolt and other Russian
thinkers.

According to historian David Armitage, the Declaration of Independence did prove
to be internationally influential, but not as a statement of human rights.
Armitage argued that the Declaration was the first in a new genre of
declarations of independence that announced the creation of new states.

Other French leaders were directly influenced by the text of the Declaration of
Independence itself. The Manifesto of the Province of Flanders (1790) was the
first foreign derivation of the Declaration; others include the Venezuelan
Declaration of Independence (1811), the Liberian Declaration of Independence
(1847), the declarations of secession by the Confederate States of America
(1860–61), and the Vietnamese Proclamation of Independence (1945). These
declarations echoed the United States Declaration of Independence in announcing
the independence of a new state, without necessarily endorsing the political
philosophy of the original.

Other countries have used the Declaration as inspiration or have directly copied
sections from it. These include the Haitian declaration of January 1, 1804
during the Haitian Revolution, the United Provinces of New Granada in 1811, the
Argentine Declaration of Independence in 1816, the Chilean Declaration of
Independence in 1818, Costa Rica in 1821, El Salvador in 1821, Guatemala in
1821, Honduras in (1821), Mexico in 1821, Nicaragua in 1821, Peru in 1821,
Bolivian War of Independence in 1825, Uruguay in 1825, Ecuador in 1830, Colombia
in 1831, Paraguay in 1842, Dominican Republic in 1844, Texas Declaration of
Independence in March 1836, California Republic in November 1836, Hungarian
Declaration of Independence in 1849, Declaration of the Independence of New
Zealand in 1835, and the Czechoslovak declaration of independence from 1918
drafted in Washington D.C. with Gutzon Borglum among the drafters. The Rhodesian
declaration of independence, ratified in November 1965, is based on the American
one as well; however, it omits the phrases "all men are created equal" and "the
consent of the governed". The South Carolina declaration of secession from
December 1860 also mentions the U.S. Declaration of Independence, though it,
like the Rhodesian one, omits references to "all men are created equal" and
"consent of the governed".

Interest in the Declaration was revived in the 1790s with the emergence of the
United States's first political parties. Throughout the 1780s, few Americans
knew or cared who wrote the Declaration. But in the next decade, Jeffersonian
Republicans sought political advantage over their rival Federalists by promoting
both the importance of the Declaration and Jefferson as its author. Federalists
responded by casting doubt on Jefferson's authorship or originality, and by
emphasizing that independence was declared by the whole Congress, with Jefferson
as just one member of the drafting committee. Federalists insisted that
Congress's act of declaring independence, in which Federalist John Adams had
played a major role, was more important than the document announcing it. But
this view faded away, like the Federalist Party itself, and, before long, the
act of declaring independence became synonymous with the document.

A less partisan appreciation for the Declaration emerged in the years following
the War of 1812, thanks to a growing American nationalism and a renewed interest
in the history of the Revolution. In 1817, Congress commissioned John Trumbull's
famous painting of the signers, which was exhibited to large crowds before being
installed in the Capitol. The earliest commemorative printings of the
Declaration also appeared at this time, offering many Americans their first view
of the signed document. Collective biographies of the signers were first
published in the 1820s, giving birth to what Garry Wills called the "cult of the
signers". In the years that followed, many stories about the writing and signing
of the document were published for the first time.

When interest in the Declaration was revived, the sections that were most
important in 1776 were no longer relevant: the announcement of the independence
of the United States and the grievances against King George. But the second
paragraph was applicable long after the war had ended, with its talk of
self-evident truths and unalienable rights. The Constitution and the Bill of
Rights lacked sweeping statements about rights and equality, and advocates of
groups with grievances turned to the Declaration for support. Starting in the
1820s, variations of the Declaration were issued to proclaim the rights of
workers, farmers, women, and others. In 1848, for example, the Seneca Falls
Convention of women's rights advocates declared that "all men and women are
created equal".

The apparent contradiction between the claim that "all men are created equal"
and the existence of American slavery attracted comment when the Declaration was
first published. As mentioned above, Jefferson had included a paragraph in his
initial draft that strongly indicted Great Britain's role in the slave trade,
but this was deleted from the final version. Jefferson himself was a prominent
Virginia slave holder, having owned hundreds of slaves. Referring to this
seeming contradiction, English abolitionist Thomas Day wrote in a 1776 letter,
"If there be an object truly ridiculous in nature, it is an American patriot,
signing resolutions of independency with the one hand, and with the other
brandishing a whip over his affrighted slaves."

In the 19th century, the Declaration took on a special significance for the
abolitionist movement. Historian Bertram Wyatt-Brown wrote that "abolitionists
tended to interpret the Declaration of Independence as a theological as well as
a political document". Abolitionist leaders Benjamin Lundy and William Lloyd
Garrison adopted the "twin rocks" of "the Bible and the Declaration of
Independence" as the basis for their philosophies. "As long as there remains a
single copy of the Declaration of Independence, or of the Bible, in our land,"
wrote Garrison, "we will not despair." For radical abolitionists such as
Garrison, the most important part of the Declaration was its assertion of the
right of revolution. Garrison called for the destruction of the government under
the Constitution, and the creation of a new state dedicated to the principles of
the Declaration.

The controversial question of whether to add additional slave states to the
United States coincided with the growing stature of the Declaration. The first
major public debate about slavery and the Declaration took place during the
Missouri controversy of 1819 to 1821. Antislavery Congressmen argued that the
language of the Declaration indicated that the Founding Fathers of the United
States had been opposed to slavery in principle, and so new slave states should
not be added to the country. Proslavery Congressmen led by Senator Nathaniel
Macon of North Carolina argued that the Declaration was not a part of the
Constitution and therefore had no relevance to the question.

With the antislavery movement gaining momentum, defenders of slavery such as
John Randolph and John C. Calhoun found it necessary to argue that the
Declaration's assertion that "all men are created equal" was false, or at least
that it did not apply to black people. During the debate over the
Kansas–Nebraska Act in 1853, for example, Senator John Pettit of Indiana argued
that the statement "all men are created equal" was not a "self-evident truth"
but a "self-evident lie". Opponents of the Kansas–Nebraska Act, including Salmon
P. Chase and Benjamin Wade, defended the Declaration and what they saw as its
antislavery principles.

The Declaration's relationship to slavery was taken up in 1854 by Abraham
Lincoln, a little-known former Congressman who idolized the Founding Fathers.
Lincoln thought that the Declaration of Independence expressed the highest
principles of the American Revolution, and that the Founding Fathers had
tolerated slavery with the expectation that it would ultimately wither away. For
the United States to legitimize the expansion of slavery in the Kansas-Nebraska
Act, thought Lincoln, was to repudiate the principles of the Revolution. In his
October 1854 Peoria speech, Lincoln said:

The meaning of the Declaration was a recurring topic in the famed debates
between Lincoln and Stephen Douglas in 1858. Douglas argued that the phrase "all
men are created equal" in the Declaration referred to white men only. The
purpose of the Declaration, he said, had simply been to justify the independence
of the United States, and not to proclaim the equality of any "inferior or
degraded race". Lincoln, however, thought that the language of the Declaration
was deliberately universal, setting a high moral standard to which the American
republic should aspire. "I had thought the Declaration contemplated the
progressive improvement in the condition of all men everywhere," he said. During
the seventh and last joint debate with Steven Douglas at Alton, Illinois on
October 15, 1858, Lincoln said about the declaration:

According to Pauline Maier, Douglas's interpretation was more historically
accurate, but Lincoln's view ultimately prevailed. "In Lincoln's hands," wrote
Maier, "the Declaration of Independence became first and foremost a living
document" with "a set of goals to be realized over time".

Like Daniel Webster, James Wilson, and Joseph Story before him, Lincoln argued
that the Declaration of Independence was a founding document of the United
States, and that this had important implications for interpreting the
Constitution, which had been ratified more than a decade after the Declaration.
The Constitution did not use the word "equality", yet Lincoln believed that the
concept that "all men are created equal" remained a part of the nation's
founding principles. He famously expressed this belief in the opening sentence
of his 1863 Gettysburg Address: "Four score and seven years ago [i.e. in 1776]
our fathers brought forth on this continent, a new nation, conceived in Liberty,
and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal."

Lincoln's view of the Declaration became influential, seeing it as a moral guide
to interpreting the Constitution. "For most people now," wrote Garry Wills in
1992, "the Declaration means what Lincoln told us it means, as a way of
correcting the Constitution itself without overthrowing it." Admirers of Lincoln
such as Harry V. Jaffa praised this development. Critics of Lincoln, notably
Willmoore Kendall and Mel Bradford, argued that Lincoln dangerously expanded the
scope of the national government and violated states' rights by reading the
Declaration into the Constitution.

In July 1848, the first woman's rights convention, the Seneca Falls Convention,
was held in Seneca Falls, New York. The convention was organized by Elizabeth
Cady Stanton, Lucretia Mott, Mary Ann McClintock, and Jane Hunt. In their
"Declaration of Sentiments", patterned on the Declaration of Independence, the
convention members demanded social and political equality for women. Their motto
was that "All men and women are created equal" and the convention demanded
suffrage for women. The suffrage movement was supported by William Lloyd
Garrison and Frederick Douglass.

The adoption of the Declaration of Independence was dramatized in the 1969 Tony
Award–winning musical play 1776, and the 1972 movie of the same name, as well as
in the 2008 television miniseries John Adams.

The text of the Declaration was chosen to become the first e-book available on
the Internet in 1971.

In 1984, the Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration was dedicated in
Constitution Gardens on the National Mall in Washington, D.C., where the
signatures of all the original signers are carved in stone with their names,
places of residence, and occupations.

The signing of the Declaration is featured on the back of the United States
two-dollar bill.

The One World Trade Center building in New York City is 1776 feet high to
symbolize the year that the Declaration of Independence was signed.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wales

Wales (i/ˈweɪlz/; Welsh: Cymru [ˈkəm.rɨ] ( listen)) is a country that is part of
the United Kingdom and the island of Great Britain. It is bordered by England to
the east, the Irish Sea to the north and west, and the Bristol Channel to the
south. It had a population in 2011 of 3,063,456 and has a total area of
20,779 km2 (8,023 sq mi). Wales has over 1,680 miles (2,700 km) of coastline and
is largely mountainous, with its higher peaks in the north and central areas,
including Snowdon (Yr Wyddfa), its highest summit. The country lies within the
north temperate zone and has a changeable, maritime climate.

Welsh national identity emerged among the Celtic Britons after the Roman
withdrawal from Britain in the 5th century, and Wales is regarded as one of the
modern Celtic nations. Llywelyn ap Gruffudd's death in 1282 marked the
completion of Edward I of England's conquest of Wales, though Owain Glyndŵr
briefly restored independence to Wales in the early 15th century. The whole of
Wales was annexed by England and incorporated within the English legal system
under the Laws in Wales Acts 1535–1542. Distinctive Welsh politics developed in
the 19th century. Welsh Liberalism, exemplified in the early 20th century by
Lloyd George, was displaced by the growth of socialism and the Labour Party.
Welsh national feeling grew over the century; Plaid Cymru was formed in 1925 and
the Welsh Language Society in 1962. Established under the Government of Wales
Act 1998, the National Assembly for Wales holds responsibility for a range of
devolved policy matters.

At the dawn of the Industrial Revolution, development of the mining and
metallurgical industries transformed the country from an agricultural society
into an industrial nation; the South Wales Coalfield's exploitation caused a
rapid expansion of Wales' population. Two-thirds of the population live in south
Wales, mainly in and around Cardiff (the capital), Swansea and Newport, and in
the nearby valleys. Now that the country's traditional extractive and heavy
industries have gone or are in decline, Wales' economy depends on the public
sector, light and service industries and tourism. Wales' 2010 gross value added
(GVA) was £45.5 billion (£15,145 per head, 74.0% of the average for the UK, and
the lowest GVA per head in Britain).

Although Wales closely shares its political and social history with the rest of
Great Britain, and the vast majority of the population speaks English, the
country has retained a distinct cultural identity and is officially bilingual.
Over 560,000 Welsh language speakers live in Wales, and the language is spoken
by a majority of the population in parts of the north and west. From the late
19th century onwards, Wales acquired its popular image as the "land of song", in
part due to the eisteddfod tradition. At many international sporting events,
such as the FIFA World Cup, Rugby World Cup and the Commonwealth Games, Wales
has its own national teams, though at the Olympic Games, Welsh athletes compete
as part of a Great Britain team. Rugby union is seen as a symbol of Welsh
identity and an expression of national consciousness.

The English words "Wales" and "Welsh" derive from the same Germanic root
(singular Walh, plural Walha), which was itself derived from the name of the
Celtic tribe known to the Romans as Volcae and which came to refer
indiscriminately to all Celts. The Old English-speaking Anglo-Saxons came to use
the term Wælisc when referring to the Celtic Britons in particular, and Wēalas
when referring to their lands. The modern names for some Continental European
lands (e.g. Wallonia and Wallachia) and peoples (e.g. the Vlachs via a borrowing
into Old Church Slavonic) have a similar etymology.

Historically in Britain, the words were not restricted to modern Wales or to the
Welsh but were used to refer to anything that the Anglo-Saxons associated with
the Britons, including other non-Germanic territories in Britain (e.g. Cornwall)
and places in Anglo-Saxon territory associated with Celtic Britons (e.g.
Walworth in County Durham and Walton in West Yorkshire), as well as items
associated with non-Germanic Europeans, such as the walnut.

The modern Welsh name for themselves is Cymry, and Cymru is the Welsh name for
Wales. These words (both of which are pronounced [ˈkəm.rɨ]) are descended from
the Brythonic word combrogi, meaning "fellow-countrymen". The use of the word
Cymry as a self-designation derives from the location in the post-Roman Era
(after the arrival of the Anglo-Saxons) of the Welsh (Brythonic-speaking) people
in modern Wales as well as in northern England and southern Scotland ("Yr Hen
Ogledd") (English: The Old North). It emphasised that the Welsh in modern Wales
and in the Hen Ogledd were one people, different from other peoples. In
particular, the term was not applied to the Cornish or the Breton peoples, who
are of similar heritage, culture, and language to the Welsh. The word came into
use as a self-description probably before the 7th century. It is attested in a
praise poem to Cadwallon ap Cadfan (Moliant Cadwallon, by Afan Ferddig) c. 633.
In Welsh literature, the word Cymry was used throughout the Middle Ages to
describe the Welsh, though the older, more generic term Brythoniaid continued to
be used to describe any of the Britonnic peoples (including the Welsh) and was
the more common literary term until c. 1100. Thereafter Cymry prevailed as a
reference to the Welsh. Until c. 1560 the word was spelt Kymry or Cymry,
regardless of whether it referred to the people or their homeland.

The Latinised forms of these names, Cambrian, Cambric and Cambria, survive as
lesser-used alternative names for Wales, Welsh and the Welsh people. Examples
include the Cambrian Mountains (which cover much of Wales and gave their name to
the Cambrian geological period), the newspaper Cambrian News, and the
organisations Cambrian Airways, Cambrian Railways, Cambrian Archaeological
Association and the Royal Cambrian Academy of Art. Outside Wales, a related form
survives as the name Cumbria in North West England, which was once a part of Yr
Hen Ogledd. The Cumbric language, which is thought to have been closely related
to Welsh, was spoken in this area until becoming extinct around the 12th
century. This form also appears at times in literary references, as in the
pseudohistorical "Historia Regum Britanniae" of Geoffrey of Monmouth, where the
character of Camber is described as the eponymous King of Cymru.

Wales has been inhabited by modern humans for at least 29,000 years. Continuous
human habitation dates from the end of the last ice age, between 12,000 and
10,000 years before present (BP), when Mesolithic hunter-gatherers from central
Europe began to migrate to Great Britain. At that time sea levels were much
lower than today, and the shallower parts of what is now the North Sea were dry
land. The east coast of present day England and the coasts of present day
Denmark, Germany and the Netherlands were connected by the former landmass known
as Doggerland, forming the British Peninsula on the European mainland. Wales was
free of glaciers by about 10,250 BP, the warmer climate allowing the area to
become heavily wooded. The post-glacial rise in sea level separated Wales and
Ireland, forming the Irish Sea. Doggerland was submerged by the North Sea and,
by 8,000 BP, the British Peninsula had become an island. By the beginning of the
Neolithic (c. 6,000 BP) sea levels in the Bristol Channel were still about 33
feet (10 metres) lower than today. John Davies has theorised that the story of
Cantre'r Gwaelod's drowning and tales in the Mabinogion, of the waters between
Wales and Ireland being narrower and shallower, may be distant folk memories of
this time.

Neolithic colonists integrated with the indigenous people, gradually changing
their lifestyles from a nomadic life of hunting and gathering, to become settled
farmers about 6,000 BP – the Neolithic Revolution. They cleared the forests to
establish pasture and to cultivate the land, developed new technologies such as
ceramics and textile production, and built cromlechs such as Pentre Ifan, Bryn
Celli Ddu and Parc Cwm long cairn between about 5,800 BP and 5,500 BP. In common
with people living all over Great Britain, over the following centuries the
people living in what was to become known as Wales assimilated immigrants and
exchanged ideas of the Bronze Age and Iron Age Celtic cultures. According to
John T. Koch and others, Wales in the Late Bronze Age was part of a maritime
trading-networked culture that also included the other Celtic nations, England,
France, Spain and Portugal where Celtic languages developed. This view,
sometimes called "Atlantic-Celtic", stands against the view that the Celtic
languages have their origins farther east with the Hallstatt culture. By the
time of the Roman invasion of Britain the area of modern Wales had been divided
among the tribes of the Deceangli, Ordovices, Cornovii, Demetae and Silures for
centuries.

The Roman conquest of Wales began in AD 48 and took 30 years to complete. Roman
rule lasted over 300 years. The campaigns of conquest are the most widely known
feature of Wales during the Roman era, because of the spirited, but ultimately
unsuccessful, defence of their homelands by two native tribes: the Silures and
the Ordovices. Roman rule in Wales was a military occupation, save for the
southern coastal region of south Wales, east of the Gower Peninsula, where there
is a legacy of Romanisation. The only town in Wales founded by the Romans,
Caerwent, is in south east Wales. Both Caerwent and Carmarthen, also in southern
Wales, became Roman civitates. Wales had a rich mineral wealth. The Romans used
their engineering technology to extract large amounts of gold, copper and lead,
as well as modest amounts of some other metals such as zinc and silver. Roman
economic development was concentrated in south-eastern Britain, and no
significant industries located in Wales. This was largely a matter of
circumstance, as Wales had none of the necessary materials in suitable
combination, and the forested, mountainous countryside was not amenable to
industrialisation. Although Latin became the official language of Wales, the
people tended to continue to speak in Brythonic. While Romanisation was far from
complete, the upper classes of Wales began to consider themselves Roman,
particularly after the ruling of 212 that granted Roman citizenship to all free
men throughout the Empire. Further Roman influence came through the spread of
Christianity, which gained many followers when Christians were allowed to
worship freely; state persecution ceased in the 4th century, as a result of
Constantine I issuing an edict of toleration in 313.

Early historians, including the 6th century cleric Gildas, have noted 383 as a
significant point in Welsh history, as it is stated in literature as the
foundation point of several medieval royal dynasties. In that year the Roman
general Magnus Maximus, or Macsen Wledig, stripped all of western and northern
Britain of troops and senior administrators, to launch a successful bid for
imperial power; continuing to rule Britain from Gaul as emperor. Gildas, writing
in about 540, says that Maximus departed Britain, taking with him all of its
Roman troops, armed bands, governors and the flower of its youth, never to
return. Having left with the troops and Roman administrators, and planning to
continue as the ruler of Britain in the future, his practical course was to
transfer local authority to local rulers. The earliest Welsh genealogies give
Maximus the role of founding father for several royal dynasties, including those
of Powys and Gwent. It was this transfer of power that has given rise to the
belief that he was the father of the Welsh Nation. He is given as the ancestor
of a Welsh king on the Pillar of Eliseg, erected nearly 500 years after he left
Britain, and he figures in lists of the Fifteen Tribes of Wales.

The 400-year period following the collapse of Roman rule is the most difficult
to interpret in the history of Wales. After the Roman departure from Britain in
AD 410, much of the lowlands of Britain to the east and south-east was overrun
by various Germanic peoples. Before extensive studies of the distribution of R1b
Y-DNA subclades, some previously maintained that native Britons were displaced
by the invaders. This idea has been discarded in the face of evidence that much
of the population has, at the latest, Hallstatt era origins, but probably late
Neolithic, or at earliest Mesolithic origins with little contribution from
Anglo-Saxon source areas. However, by AD 500, the land that would become Wales
had divided into a number of kingdoms free from Anglo-Saxon rule. The kingdoms
of Gwynedd, Powys, Dyfed and Seisyllwg, Morgannwg and Gwent emerged as
independent Welsh successor states. Archaeological evidence, in the Low
Countries and what was to become England, shows early Anglo-Saxon migration to
Great Britain reversed between 500 to 550, which concurs with Frankish
chronicles. John Davies notes this as consistent with the British victory at
Badon Hill, attributed to Arthur by Nennius. This tenacious survival by the
Romano-Britons and their descendants in the western kingdoms was to become the
foundation of what we now know as Wales. With the loss of the lowlands,
England's kingdoms of Mercia and Northumbria, and later Wessex, wrestled with
Powys, Gwent and Gwynedd to define the frontier between the two peoples.

Having lost much of what is now the West Midlands to Mercia in the 6th and early
7th centuries, a resurgent late-7th-century Powys checked Mercian advances.
Aethelbald of Mercia, looking to defend recently acquired lands, had built Wat's
Dyke. According to John Davies, this endeavour may have been with the agreement
of Powys king Elisedd ap Gwylog, as this boundary, extending north from the
valley of the River Severn to the Dee estuary, gave Oswestry to Powys. Another
theory, after carbon dating placed the dyke's existence 300 years earlier, is
that it may have been built by the post-Roman rulers of Wroxeter. King Offa of
Mercia seems to have continued this consultative initiative when he created a
larger earthwork, now known as Offa's Dyke (Clawdd Offa). Davies wrote of Cyril
Fox's study of Offa's Dyke: "In the planning of it, there was a degree of
consultation with the kings of Powys and Gwent. On the Long Mountain near
Trelystan, the dyke veers to the east, leaving the fertile slopes in the hands
of the Welsh; near Rhiwabon, it was designed to ensure that Cadell ap Brochwel
retained possession of the Fortress of Penygadden." And, for Gwent, Offa had the
dyke built "on the eastern crest of the gorge, clearly with the intention of
recognizing that the River Wye and its traffic belonged to the kingdom of
Gwent." However, Fox's interpretations of both the length and purpose of the
Dyke have been questioned by more recent research. Offa's Dyke largely remained
the frontier between the Welsh and English, though the Welsh would recover by
the 12th century the area between the Dee (Afon Dyfrdwy) and the Conwy, known
then as Y Berfeddwlad. By the 8th century, the eastern borders with the
Anglo-Saxons had broadly been set.

In 853, the Vikings raided Anglesey, but in 856, Rhodri Mawr defeated and killed
their leader, Gorm. The Britons of Wales later made their peace with the Vikings
and Anarawd ap Rhodri allied with the Norsemen occupying Northumbria to conquer
the north. This alliance later broke down and Anarawd came to an agreement with
Alfred, king of Wessex, with whom he fought against the west Welsh. According to
Annales Cambriae, in 894, "Anarawd came with the Angles and laid waste
Ceredigion and Ystrad Tywi."

The southern and eastern parts of Great Britain lost to English settlement
became known in Welsh as Lloegyr (Modern Welsh Lloegr), which may have referred
to the kingdom of Mercia originally and which came to refer to England as a
whole.[nb 1] The Germanic tribes who now dominated these lands were invariably
called Saeson, meaning "Saxons". The Anglo-Saxons called the Romano-British
'Walha', meaning 'Romanised foreigner' or 'stranger'. The Welsh continued to
call themselves Brythoniaid (Brythons or Britons) well into the Middle Ages,
though the first written evidence of the use of Cymru and y Cymry is found in a
praise poem to Cadwallon ap Cadfan (Moliant Cadwallon, by Afan Ferddig) c. 633.
In Armes Prydain, believed to be written around 930–942, the words Cymry and
Cymro are used as often as 15 times. However, from the Anglo-Saxon settlement
onwards, the people gradually begin to adopt the name Cymry over Brythoniad.

From 800 onwards, a series of dynastic marriages led to Rhodri Mawr's (r.
844–77) inheritance of Gwynedd and Powys. His sons in turn would found three
principal dynasties (Aberffraw for Gwynedd, Dinefwr for Deheubarth and Mathrafal
for Powys). Rhodri's grandson Hywel Dda (r. 900–50) founded Deheubarth out of
his maternal and paternal inheritances of Dyfed and Seisyllwg in 930, ousted the
Aberffraw dynasty from Gwynedd and Powys and then codified Welsh law in the
940s. Maredudd ab Owain (r. 986–99) of Deheubarth (Hywel's grandson) would,
(again) temporarily oust the Aberffraw line from control of Gwynedd and Powys.

Maredudd's great-grandson (through his daughter Princess Angharad) Gruffydd ap
Llywelyn (r. 1039–63) would conquer his cousins' realms from his base in Powys,
and even extend his authority into England. Historian John Davies states that
Gruffydd was "the only Welsh king ever to rule over the entire territory of
Wales... Thus, from about 1057 until his death in 1063, the whole of Wales
recognised the kingship of Gruffudd ap Llywelyn. For about seven brief years,
Wales was one, under one ruler, a feat with neither precedent nor successor."
Owain Gwynedd (1100–70) of the Aberffraw line was the first Welsh ruler to use
the title princeps Wallensium (prince of the Welsh), a title of substance given
his victory on the Berwyn Mountains, according to John Davies.

Within four years of the Battle of Hastings, England had been completely
subjugated by the Normans. William I of England established a series of
lordships, allocated to his most powerful warriors along the Welsh border, the
boundaries fixed only to the east. This frontier region, and any English-held
lordships in Wales, became known as Marchia Wallie, the Welsh Marches, in which
the Marcher Lords were subject to neither English nor Welsh law. The area of the
March varied as the fortunes of the Marcher Lords and the Welsh princes ebbed
and flowed. The March of Wales, which existed for over 450 years, was abolished
under the Acts of Union in 1536.

Owain Gwynedd's grandson Llywelyn Fawr (the Great, 1173–1240), wrested
concessions through the Magna Carta in 1215 and receiving the fealty of other
Welsh lords in 1216 at the council at Aberdyfi, became the first Prince of
Wales. His grandson Llywelyn ap Gruffudd also secured the recognition of the
title Prince of Wales from Henry III with the Treaty of Montgomery in 1267.
Later however, a succession of disputes, including the imprisonment of
Llywelyn's wife Eleanor, daughter of Simon de Montfort, culminated in the first
invasion by King Edward I of England. As a result of military defeat, the Treaty
of Aberconwy exacted Llywelyn's fealty to England in 1277. Peace was short lived
and, with the 1282 Edwardian conquest, the rule of the Welsh princes permanently
ended. With Llywelyn's death and his brother prince Dafydd's execution, the few
remaining Welsh lords did homage for their lands to Edward I. Llywelyn's head
was carried through London on a spear; his baby daughter Gwenllian was locked in
the priory at Sempringham, where she remained until her death 54 years later.

To help maintain his dominance, Edward constructed a series of great stone
castles: Beaumaris, Caernarfon and Conwy. His son, the future King Edward II of
England, was born at Edward's new castle at Caernarfon in 1284. He became the
first English Prince of Wales, not as an infant, but in 1301. The apocryphal
story that Edward tricked the Welsh by offering them a Welsh-born Prince who
could speak no English was first recorded in 1584. The title also provided an
income from the north-west part of Wales known as the Principality of Wales,
until the Act of Union (1536), after which the term principality, when used, was
associated with the whole of Wales. After the failed revolt in 1294–95 of Madog
ap Llywelyn – who styled himself Prince of Wales in the Penmachno Document – and
the rising of Llywelyn Bren (1316), the next major uprising was that led by
Owain Glyndŵr , against Henry IV of England. In 1404, Owain was reputedly
crowned Prince of Wales in the presence of emissaries from France, Spain and
Scotland. Glyndŵr went on to hold parliamentary assemblies at several Welsh
towns, including Machynlleth. But the rebellion failed, and Owain went into
hiding in 1412; peace was essentially restored in Wales by 1415. Although the
Statute of Rhuddlan in 1284 provided the constitutional basis for post-conquest
government of the Principality of north Wales from 1284 until 1536, there was no
formal Union until 1536. Shortly afterwards Welsh law, which had continued to be
used in Wales after the Norman conquest, was fully replaced by English law,
under what would become known as the Act of Union.

Prior to the British Industrial Revolution, which saw a rapid economic expansion
between 1750 and 1850, there were signs of small-scale industries scattered
throughout Wales. These ranged from industries connected to agriculture, such as
milling and the manufacture of woollen textiles, through to mining and
quarrying. Until the Industrial Revolution, Wales had always been reliant on its
agricultural output for its wealth and employment and the earliest industrial
businesses were small scale and localised in manner. The emerging industrial
period commenced around the development of copper smelting in the Swansea area.
With access to local coal deposits and a harbour that could take advantage of
Cornwall's copper mines and the copper deposits being extracted from the
then-largest copper mine in the world at Parys Mountain on Anglesey, Swansea
developed into the world's major centre for non-ferrous metal smelting in the
19th century. The second metal industry to expand in Wales was iron smelting,
and iron manufacturing became prevalent in both the north and the south of the
country. In the north of Wales, John Wilkinson's Ironworks at Bersham was a
significant industry, while in the south, a second world centre of metallurgy
was founded in Merthyr Tydfil, where the four ironworks of Dowlais, Cyfarthfa,
Plymouth and Penydarren became the most significant hub of iron manufacture in
Wales. In the 1820s, south Wales alone accounted for 40% of all pig iron
manufactured in Britain.

In the late 18th century, slate quarrying began to expand rapidly, most notably
in north Wales. The Penrhyn Quarry, opened in 1770 by Richard Pennant, was
employing 15,000 men by the late 19th century, and along with Dinorwic Quarry,
it dominated the Welsh slate trade. Although slate quarrying has been described
as 'the most Welsh of Welsh industries', it is coal mining which has become the
single industry synonymous with Wales and its people. Initially, coal seams were
exploited to provide energy for local metal industries but, with the opening of
canal systems and later the railways, Welsh coal mining saw a boom in its
demand. As the south Wales coalfield was exploited, mainly in the upland valleys
around Aberdare and later the Rhondda, the ports of Swansea, Cardiff and later
Penarth, grew into world exporters of coal and, with them, came a population
boom. By its height in 1913, Wales was producing almost 61 million tons of coal.
As well as in south Wales, there was also a significant coalfield in the
north-east of the country, particularly around Wrexham. As Wales was reliant on
the production of capital goods rather than consumer goods, it possessed few of
the skilled craftspeople and artisans found in the workshops of Birmingham or
Sheffield in England and had few factories producing finished goods – a key
feature of most regions associated with the Industrial Revolution. However,
there is increasing support that the industrial revolution was reliant on
harnessing the energy and materials provided by Wales and, in that sense, Wales
was of central importance.

Historian Kenneth Morgan described Wales on the eve of the First World War as a
"relatively placid, self-confident and successful nation". Output from the
coalfields continued to increase, with the Rhondda Valley recording a peak of
9.6 million tons of coal extracted in 1913. The outbreak of the First World War
(1914–1918) saw Wales, as part of the United Kingdom, enter hostilities with
Germany. A total of 272,924 Welshmen served in the war, representing 21.5% of
the male population. Of these, roughly 35,000 were killed. The two most notable
battles of the War to include Welsh forces were those at Mametz Wood on the
Somme and the Battle of Passchendaele.

The first quarter of the 20th century also saw a shift in the political
landscape of Wales. Since 1865, the Liberal Party had held a parliamentary
majority in Wales and, following the general election of 1906, only one
non-Liberal Member of Parliament, Keir Hardie of Merthyr Tydfil, represented a
Welsh constituency at Westminster. Yet by 1906, industrial dissension and
political militancy had begun to undermine Liberal consensus in the southern
coalfields. In 1916, David Lloyd George became the first Welshman to become
Prime Minister of Britain when he was made head of the 1916 coalition
government. In December 1918, Lloyd George was re-elected at the head of a
Conservative-dominated coalition government, and his poor handling of the 1919
coalminers' strike was a key factor in destroying support for the Liberal party
in south Wales. The industrial workers of Wales began shifting towards a new
political organisation, established by Hardie and others to ensure an elected
representation for the working class, which is now called the Labour Party. When
in 1908 the Miners' Federation of Great Britain became affiliated to the Labour
Party, the four Labour candidates sponsored by miners were all elected as MPs.
By 1922, half of the Welsh seats at Westminster were held by Labour
politicians—the start of a Labour hegemony which would dominate Wales into the
21st century.

After economic growth in the first two decades of the 20th century, Wales'
staple industries endured a prolonged slump from the early 1920s to the late
1930s, leading to widespread unemployment and poverty in the south Wales
valleys. For the first time in centuries, the population of Wales went into
decline; the scourge of unemployment only relented with the production demands
of the Second World War. The Second World War (1939–1945) saw Welsh servicemen
and women fight in all the major theatres of war, with some 15,000 of them
killed. Bombing raids brought major loss of life as the German Air Force
targeted the docks at Swansea, Cardiff and Pembroke. After 1943, 10% of Welsh
conscripts aged 18 were sent to work in the coal mines, where there were labour
shortages; they became known as Bevin Boys. Pacifist numbers during both World
Wars were fairly low, especially in the Second World War, which was seen as a
fight against fascism. Of the political parties active in Wales, only Plaid
Cymru took a neutral stance, on the grounds that it was an "imperialist war".

The 20th century saw a revival in Welsh national feeling. Plaid Cymru was formed
in 1925, seeking greater autonomy or independence from the rest of the UK. The
term "England and Wales" became common for describing the area to which English
law applied, and in 1955 Cardiff was proclaimed as capital city of Wales.
Cymdeithas yr Iaith Gymraeg (The Welsh Language Society) was formed in 1962, in
response to long-held fears that the language might soon die out. Nationalist
sentiment grew following the flooding of the Tryweryn valley in 1965 to create a
reservoir to supply water to the English city of Liverpool. Despite 35 of the 36
Welsh MPs voting against the bill (the other one abstained), Parliament passed
the bill and the village of Capel Celyn was submerged, highlighting Wales'
powerlessness in her own affairs in the face of the numerical superiority of
English MPs in the Westminster Parliament. Both the Free Wales Army and Mudiad
Amddiffyn Cymru (Welsh Defence Movement, abbreviated as MAC) were formed as a
direct result of the Tryweryn destruction, conducting campaigns from 1963. In
the years leading up to the investiture of Prince Charles as Prince of Wales in
1969, these groups were responsible for a number of bomb blasts—destroying water
pipes, tax and other offices and part of the dam at the new Clywedog reservoir
project in Montgomeryshire, being built to supply water to the English Midlands.
At a by-election in 1966, Gwynfor Evans won the parliamentary seat of
Carmarthen, Plaid Cymru's first Parliamentary seat. In the following year, the
Wales and Berwick Act 1746 was repealed and a legal definition of Wales and of
the boundary with England was stated.

By the end of the 1960s, the regional policy of bringing businesses into
disadvantaged areas of Wales through financial incentives had proven very
successful in diversifying the industrial economy. This policy, begun in 1934,
was enhanced by the construction of industrial estates and improvements in
transport communications, most notably the M4 motorway linking south Wales
directly to London. It was believed that the foundations for stable economic
growth had been firmly established in Wales during this period; but this view
was shown to be wildly optimistic after the recession of the early 1980s saw the
collapse of much of the manufacturing base that had been built over the
preceding forty years.

In the first referendum, in 1979, the Welsh electorate voted on the creation of
an assembly for Wales, but there was a large majority for the "no" vote. However
in 1997 a referendum on the same issue secured a "yes", although by a very
narrow majority. The National Assembly for Wales (Cynulliad Cenedlaethol Cymru)
was set up in 1999 (under the Government of Wales Act 1998) and has the power to
determine how the central government budget for Wales is spent and administered,
although the UK parliament reserves the right to set limits on the powers of the
Welsh Assembly.

The governments of the United Kingdom and of Wales almost invariably define
Wales as a country. The Welsh Government says: "Wales is not a Principality.
Although we are joined with England by land, and we are part of Great Britain,
Wales is a country in its own right." The title Prince of Wales is still
conferred on the heir apparent to the British throne, currently Prince Charles.
However the Prince of Wales has no constitutional role in modern Wales.
According to the Welsh Government: "Our Prince of Wales at the moment is Prince
Charles, who is the present heir to the throne. But he does not have a role in
the governance of Wales, even though his title might suggest that he does."

Wales is a country that is part of the United Kingdom. Constitutionally, the UK
is a de jure unitary state, its parliament and government in Westminster. In the
House of Commons – the lower house of the UK government – Wales is represented
by 40 MPs (out of 650) from Welsh constituencies. Labour MPs hold 25 of the 40
seats, the Conservatives eleven, Plaid Cymru three and the Liberal Democrats
hold one seat. A Secretary of State for Wales sits in the UK cabinet and is
responsible for representing[clarification needed] matters pertaining to Wales.
The Wales Office is a department of the United Kingdom government, responsible
for Wales. Alun Cairns has been Secretary of State for Wales since March 2016.

Referendums held in Wales and Scotland in 1997 chose to establish a form of
self-government in both countries. In Wales, the consequent process of
devolution began with the Government of Wales Act 1998, which created the
National Assembly for Wales (Welsh: Cynulliad Cenedlaethol Cymru). Powers of the
Secretary of State for Wales were transferred to the devolved government on 1
July 1999, granting the Assembly the power to decide how the Westminster
government's budget for devolved areas is spent and administered. The 1998 Act
was amended by the Government of Wales Act 2006 which enhanced the Assembly's
powers, giving it legislative powers akin to those of the Scottish Parliament
and Northern Ireland Assembly. The Assembly has 60 members, known as Assembly
Members (Aelodau y Cynulliad). Members (AMs (ACau)) are elected for four-year
terms under an additional member system. Forty of the AMs represent geographical
constituencies, elected under the First Past the Post system. The remaining
twenty AMs represent five electoral regions, each including between seven and
nine constituencies, using the d'Hondt method of proportional representation.
The Assembly must elect a First Minister, who selects ministers to form the
Welsh Government.

Labour remained the largest Assembly party following the 2007 election, winning
26 of the 60 seats. Having insufficient support to form a government, the Labour
Party entered into the 'One Wales' agreement with Plaid Cymru, forming a
coalition, with the Labour leader as First Minister. Carwyn Jones has been First
Minister and leader of Welsh Labour since Rhodri Morgan retired from office in
December 2009, after nine years and ten months as First Minister. Ieuan Wyn
Jones, Deputy First Minister in the coalition government, was leader of Plaid
Cymru, the second-largest party in the Assembly with 14 of the 60 seats. Under
the 'One Wales' agreement, a referendum on giving the Welsh assembly full
law-making powers was promised "as soon as practicable, at or before the end of
the assembly term (in 2011)" and both parties have agreed "in good faith to
campaign for a successful outcome to such a referendum".

Welsh Labour remained the largest party in the Assembly following the National
Assembly for Wales election, 2011, winning 30 of the 60 seats. Other parties
represented in the assembly were the Welsh Conservatives (the loyal opposition)
with 14 seats, Plaid Cymru who have 11 seats and the Welsh Liberal Democrats
with five seats. Carwyn Jones remained First Minister following the election,
this time leading a Welsh Labour ministerial team. The Presiding Officer of the
Assembly was Rosemary Butler of Welsh Labour.

After the May 2016 election, Labour continues to form the largest group in the
Assembly, with 29 AMs. Plaid Cymru forms the official opposition, having
increased its representation to twelve AMs. The Conservative Party has eleven
AMs and the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP) achieved seven MAs for the
first time. The remaining seat is held by Kirsty Williams of the Liberal
Democrats. The vote for First Minister initially resulted in a tie between
incumbent Carwyn Jones (Labour) and Leanne Wood (Plaid Cymru). After discussions
amongst the parties, a Labour government including the Liberal Democrat AM as
Minister for Education was proposed with limited policy-based support from Plaid
Cymru, and Carwyn Jones was re-elected as First Minister. Elin Jones of Plaid
Cymru was elected Presiding Officer. In August 2016, one of the UKIP AMs left
his group and continues to sit as an Independent member, and in October 2016,
former Plaid Cymru president and inaugural Presiding Officer of the National
Assembly, Dafydd Elis-Thomas, left his party and also continues to sit as an
Independent member.

The twenty areas of responsibility devolved to the Welsh Government, known as
"subjects", include agriculture, economic development, education, health,
housing, local government, social services, tourism, transport and the Welsh
language. On its creation in 1999, the National Assembly for Wales had no
primary legislative powers. However, since the Government of Wales Act 2006
(GoWA 2006) came into effect in 2007, the Assembly has power to pass primary
legislation as Assembly Measures on some specific matters within the areas of
devolved responsibility. Further matters have been added subsequently, either
directly by the UK Parliament or by the UK Parliament approving a Legislative
Competence Order (LCO, a request from the National Assembly for additional
powers). The GoWA 2006 allows for the Assembly to gain primary lawmaking powers
on a more extensive range of matters within the same devolved areas if approved
in a referendum.

A referendum on extending the law-making powers of the National Assembly was
accordingly held on 3 March 2011. It asked the question: "Do you want the
Assembly now to be able to make laws on all matters in the 20 subject areas it
has powers for?" 63.49% of the voters voted 'yes', and 36.51% voted 'no'.
Consequently, the Assembly is now empowered to make laws, known as Acts of the
Assembly, on all matters in the subject areas, without needing the UK
Parliament's agreement.

Wales is also a distinct UK electoral region of the European Union represented
by four Members of the European Parliament.

For the purposes of local government, Wales has been divided into 22 council
areas since 1996. These "principal areas" are responsible for the provision of
all local government services, including education, social work, environment and
roads services.

Note: Wales has six cities. In addition to Cardiff, Newport and Swansea, the
communities of Bangor, St Asaph and St Davids also have city status in the
United Kingdom.

By tradition, Welsh Law was compiled during an assembly held at Whitland around
930 by Hywel Dda, king of most of Wales between 942 and his death in 950. The
'law of Hywel Dda' (Welsh: Cyfraith Hywel), as it became known, codified the
previously existing folk laws and legal customs that had evolved in Wales over
centuries. Welsh Law emphasised the payment of compensation for a crime to the
victim, or the victim's kin, rather than punishment by the ruler. Other than in
the Marches, where law was imposed by the Marcher Lords, Welsh Law remained in
force in Wales until the Statute of Rhuddlan in 1284. Edward I of England
annexed the Principality of Wales following the death of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd,
and Welsh Law was replaced for criminal cases under the Statute. Marcher Law and
Welsh Law (for civil cases) remained in force until Henry VIII of England
annexed the whole of Wales under the Laws in Wales Acts 1535–1542 (often
referred to as the Acts of Union of 1536 and 1543), after which English law
applied to the whole of Wales. The Wales and Berwick Act 1746 provided that all
laws that applied to England would automatically apply to Wales (and the
Anglo-Scottish border town of Berwick) unless the law explicitly stated
otherwise; this Act was repealed with regard to Wales in 1967. English law has
been the legal system of Wales and England since 1536, and continues to be so,
although there is now a growing body of contemporary Welsh law since devolution
to Wales since 1999.

English law is regarded as a common law system, with no major codification of
the law, and legal precedents are binding as opposed to persuasive.

The court system is headed by the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom which is
the highest court of appeal in the land for criminal and civil cases. The Senior
Courts of England and Wales is the highest court of first instance as well as an
appellate court. The three divisions are the Court of Appeal; the High Court of
Justice and the Crown Court. Minor cases are heard by the Magistrates' Courts or
the County Court. In 2007 the Wales and Cheshire Region (known as the Wales and
Cheshire Circuit before 2005) came to an end when Cheshire was attached to the
North-Western England Region. From that point Wales became a legal unit in its
own right, although it remains part of the single jurisdiction of England and
Wales.

The Welsh Assembly has the authority to draft and approve laws outside of the UK
Parliamentary system to meet the specific needs of Wales. Under powers approved
by a referendum held in March 2011, it is empowered to pass primary legislation
known as Acts of the Assembly in relation to twenty subjects listed in the
Government of Wales Act 2006 such as health and education. Through this primary
legislation, the Welsh Government can then also enact more specific secondary
legislation.

Wales is served by four regional police forces, Dyfed-Powys Police, Gwent
Police, North Wales Police and South Wales Police. Four prisons are in Wales;
all in the southern half of the country. Wales has no women's prisons; female
inmates are imprisoned in England.

Wales is a generally mountainous country on the western side of central southern
Great Britain. It is about 170 miles (270 km) north–south and 60 miles (97 km)
east–west. The oft-quoted 'size of Wales' is about 20,779 km2 (8,023 sq mi).
Wales is bordered by England to the east and by sea in all other directions: the
Irish Sea to the north and west, St George's Channel and the Celtic Sea to the
southwest and the Bristol Channel to the south. Wales has about 1,680 miles
(2,700 km) of coastline (along the mean high water mark), including the
mainland, Anglesey and Holyhead. Over 50 islands lie off the Welsh mainland; the
largest being Anglesey, in the north-west.

Much of Wales' diverse landscape is mountainous, particularly in the north and
central regions. The mountains were shaped during the last ice age, the
Devensian glaciation. The highest mountains in Wales are in Snowdonia (Eryri),
of which five are over 1,000 m (3,300 ft). The highest of these is Snowdon (Yr
Wyddfa), at 1,085 m (3,560 ft). The 14 Welsh mountains, or 15 if including
Garnedd Uchaf – often discounted because of its low topographic prominence –
over 3,000 feet (910 metres) high are known collectively as the Welsh 3000s and
are located in a small area in the north-west.

The highest outside the 3000s is Aran Fawddwy, at 905 metres (2,969 feet), in
the south of Snowdonia. The Brecon Beacons (Bannau Brycheiniog) are in the south
(highest point Pen y Fan, at 886 metres (2,907 feet)), and are joined by the
Cambrian Mountains in Mid Wales. The highest point being Pumlumon at 752 metres
(2,467 feet).

Wales has three national parks: Snowdonia, Brecon Beacons and Pembrokeshire
Coast. It has five Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty; Anglesey, the Clwydian
Range and Dee Valley, the Gower Peninsula, the Llŷn Peninsula, and the Wye
Valley. The Gower Peninsula was the first area in the United Kingdom to be
designated as an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, in 1956. Forty two percent
of the coastline of south and west Wales is designated as Heritage Coast, with
13 specific designated strips of coastline maintained by Natural Resources Wales
(successor body to the Countryside Council for Wales). As from 2012 the
coastline of Wales has 43 Blue Flag beaches and five Blue Flag marinas. Despite
its heritage and award winning beaches; the south and west coasts of Wales,
along with the Irish and Cornish coasts, are frequently blasted by Atlantic
westerlies/south westerlies that, over the years, have sunk and wrecked many
vessels. On the night of 25 October 1859, over 110 ships were destroyed off the
coast of Wales when a hurricane blew in from the Atlantic. More than 800 lives
were lost across Britain because of the storm, but the greatest tragedy was the
sinking of the Royal Charter off the coast of Anglesey in which 459 people died.
The number of shipwrecks around the coast of Wales reached a peak in the 19th
century with over 100 vessels lost and an average loss of life of about 78
sailors per year. Wartime action caused losses near Holyhead, Milford Haven and
Swansea. Because of offshore rocks and unlit islands, Anglesey and Pembrokeshire
are still notorious for shipwrecks, most notably the Sea Empress oil spill in
1996.

The first border between Wales and England was zonal, apart from around the
River Wye, which was the first accepted boundary. Offa's Dyke was supposed to
form an early distinct line but this was thwarted by Gruffudd ap Llewellyn, who
reclaimed swathes of land beyond the dyke. The Act of Union of 1536 formed a
linear border stretching from the mouth of the Dee to the mouth of the Wye. Even
after the Act of Union, many of the borders remained vague and moveable until
the Welsh Sunday Closing act of 1881, which forced local businesses to decide
which country they fell within to accept either the Welsh or English law.

The Seven Wonders of Wales is a list in doggerel verse of seven geographic and
cultural landmarks in Wales probably composed in the late 18th century under the
influence of tourism from England. All the "wonders" are in north Wales: Snowdon
(the highest mountain), the Gresford bells (the peal of bells in the medieval
church of All Saints at Gresford), the Llangollen bridge (built in 1347 over the
River Dee), St Winefride's Well (a pilgrimage site at Holywell) in Flintshire,
the Wrexham (Wrecsam) steeple (16th-century tower of St Giles' Church, Wrexham),
the Overton yew trees (ancient yew trees in the churchyard of St. Mary's at
Overton-on-Dee) and Pistyll Rhaeadr – a tall waterfall, at 240 ft (73 m). The
wonders are part of the rhyme:

The earliest geological period of the Paleozoic era, the Cambrian, takes its
name from the Cambrian Mountains, where geologists first identified Cambrian
remnants. In evolutionary studies the Cambrian is the period when most major
groups of complex animals appeared (the Cambrian explosion). The older rocks
underlying the Cambrian rocks in Wales lacked fossils which could be used to
differentiate their various groups and were referred to as Pre-cambrian.

In the mid-19th century, two prominent geologists, Roderick Murchison and Adam
Sedgwick (who first proposed the name of the Cambrian period), independently
used their studies of the geology of Wales to establish certain principles of
stratigraphy and palaeontology. The next two periods of the Paleozoic era, the
Ordovician and Silurian, were named after ancient Celtic tribes from this area
based on Murchison's and Sedgwick's work.

Wales lies within the north temperate zone. It has a changeable, maritime
climate and is one of the wettest countries in Europe. Welsh weather is often
cloudy, wet and windy, with warm summers and mild winters. The long summer days
and short winter days result from Wales' northerly latitudes (between 53° 43′ N
and 51° 38′ N). Aberystwyth, at the midpoint of the country's west coast, has
nearly 17 hours of daylight at the summer solstice. Daylight at midwinter there
falls to just over seven and a half hours. The country's wide geographic
variations cause localised differences in sunshine, rainfall and temperature.
Average annual coastal temperatures reach 10.5 °C (51 °F) and in low lying
inland areas, 1 °C (1.8 °F) lower. It becomes cooler at higher altitudes; annual
temperatures decrease on average approximately 0.5 °C (0.9 °F) each 100 metres
(330 feet) of altitude. Consequently, the higher parts of Snowdonia experience
average annual temperatures of 5 °C (41 °F). Temperatures in Wales remain higher
than would otherwise be expected at its latitude because of the North Atlantic
Drift, a branch of the Gulf Stream. The ocean current, bringing warmer water to
northerly latitudes, has a similar effect on most of north-west Europe. As well
as its influence on Wales' coastal areas, air warmed by the Gulf Stream blows
further inland with the prevailing winds.

At low elevations, summers tend to be warm and sunny. Average maximum
temperatures range between 19 and 22 °C (66 and 72 °F). Winters tend to be
fairly wet, but rainfall is rarely excessive and the temperature usually stays
above freezing. Spring and autumn feel quite similar and the temperatures tend
to stay above 14 °C (57 °F) – also the average annual daytime temperature.

The sunniest time of year tends to be between May and August. The south-western
coast is the sunniest part of Wales, averaging over 1700 hours of sunshine
annually. Wales' sunniest town is Tenby, Pembrokeshire. The dullest time of year
tends to be between November and January. The least sunny areas are the
mountains, some parts of which average less than 1200 hours of sunshine
annually. The prevailing wind is south-westerly. Coastal areas are the windiest,
gales occur most often during winter, on average between 15 and 30 days each
year, depending on location. Inland, gales average fewer than six days annually.

Rainfall patterns show significant variation. The further west, the higher the
expected rainfall; up to 40% more. At low elevations, rain is unpredictable at
any time of year, although the showers tend to be shorter in summer. The uplands
of Wales have most rain, normally more than 50 days of rain during the winter
months (December to February), falling to around 35 rainy days during the summer
months (June to August). Annual rainfall in Snowdonia averages between 3,000
millimetres (120 in) (Blaenau Ffestiniog) and 5,000 millimetres (200 in)
(Snowdon's summit). The likelihood is that it will fall as sleet or snow when
the temperature falls below 5 °C (41 °F), and snow tends to be lying on the
ground there for an average of 30 days a year. Snow falls several times each
winter in inland areas, but is relatively uncommon around the coast. Average
annual rainfall in those areas can be less than 1,000 millimetres (39 in). Met
Office statistics show Swansea to be the wettest city in Great Britain, with an
average annual rainfall of 1,360.8 millimetres (53.57 in). This has led to the
old adage "If you can see Mumbles Head it is going to rain – if you can't, it is
raining". Cardiff is Great Britain's fifth wettest city, with 908 millimetres
(35.7 in). Rhyl is Wales' driest town, its average annual rainfall 640
millimetres (25 in).

Wales’ wildlife is typical of Britain with several distinctions. Because of its
long coastline Wales hosts a variety of seabirds. The coasts and surrounding
islands are home to colonies of gannets, Manx shearwater, puffins, kittiwakes,
shags and razorbills. In comparison, with 60% of Wales above the 150m contour,
the country also supports a variety of upland habitat birds, including raven and
ring ouzel. Birds of prey include the merlin, hen harrier and the red kite, a
national symbol of Welsh wildlife. In total, more than 200 different species of
bird have been seen at the RSPB reserve at Conwy, including seasonal visitors.

The larger Welsh mammals died out during the Norman period, including the brown
bear, wolf and the wildcat. Today, mammals of note include shrews, voles,
badgers, otters, hedgehogs and fifteen species of bat. Two species of small
rodent, the yellow-necked mouse and the dormouse, are of special Welsh note
being found at the historically undisturbed border area. Other animals of note
include, otter, stoat and weasel. The pine marten which has had the occasional
sighting, has not been officially recorded since the 1950s. The polecat was
nearly driven to extinction in Britain, but hung on in Wales and is now rapidly
spreading. Feral goats can be found in Snowdonia.

The waters of south-west Wales of Gower, Pembrokeshire and Cardigan Bay attract
marine animals, including basking sharks, Atlantic grey seals, leatherback
turtles, dolphins, porpoises, jellyfish, crabs and lobsters. Pembrokeshire and
Ceredigion in particular are recognised as an area of international importance
for bottlenose dolphins, and New Quay has the only summer residence of
bottlenose dolphins in the whole of the UK. River fish of note include char,
eel, salmon, shad, sparling and Arctic char, whilst the Gwyniad is unique to
Wales, found only in Bala Lake. Wales is also known for its shellfish, including
cockles, limpet, mussels and periwinkles. Herring, mackerel and hake are the
more common of the country's seafish.

The north facing high grounds of Snowdonia support a relict pre-glacial flora
including the iconic Snowdon lily – Gagea serotina – and other alpine species
such as Saxifraga cespitosa, Saxifraga oppositifolia and Silene acaulis. Wales
also hosts a number of plant species not found elsewhere in the UK including the
spotted rock-rose Tuberaria guttata on Anglesey and Draba aizoides on the Gower.

Over the last 250 years, Wales has been transformed first from a predominantly
agricultural country to an industrial, and now a post-industrial economy. Since
the Second World War, the service sector has come to account for the majority of
jobs, a feature typifying most advanced economies. Total headline Gross Value
Added (GVA) in Wales in 2010 was £45.5 billion, or £15,145 per head of
population; 74.0 per cent of the average for the UK total, the lowest GVA per
head in the UK. In the three months to July 2010, the employment rate for
working-age adults in Wales was 67 per cent, compared to 70.7 per cent across
the UK as a whole.

From the middle of the 19th century until the post-war era, the mining and
export of coal was a dominant industry. At its peak of production in 1913,
nearly 233,000 men and women were employed in the south Wales coalfield, mining
56 million tons of coal. Cardiff was once the largest coal-exporting port in the
world and, for a few years before the First World War, handled a greater tonnage
of cargo than either London or Liverpool. In the 1920s, over 40% of the male
Welsh population worked in heavy industry. According to Professor Phil Williams,
the Great Depression "devastated Wales", north and south, because of its
"overwhelming dependence on coal and steel". From the mid-1970s, the Welsh
economy faced massive restructuring with large numbers of jobs in traditional
heavy industry disappearing and being replaced eventually by new ones in light
industry and in services. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, Wales was
successful in attracting an above average share of foreign direct investment in
the UK. However, much of the new industry was essentially of a "branch factory"
("screwdriver factory") type where a manufacturing plant or call centre is
located in Wales but the most highly paid jobs in the company are retained
elsewhere.

Because of poor-quality soil, much of Wales is unsuitable for crop-growing and
livestock farming has traditionally been the focus of agriculture. The Welsh
landscape (protected by three national parks) and 45 Blue Flag beaches, as well
as the unique culture of Wales, attract large numbers of tourists, who play an
especially vital role in the economy of rural areas. Wales has struggled to
develop or attract high value-added employment in sectors such as finance and
research and development, attributable in part to a comparative lack of
'economic mass' (i.e. population) – Wales lacks a large metropolitan centre. The
lack of high value-added employment is reflected in lower economic output per
head relative to other regions of the UK – in 2002 it stood at 90% of the EU25
average and around 80% of the UK average. In June 2008, Wales made history by
becoming the first nation in the world to be awarded Fairtrade Status.

The pound sterling is the currency used in Wales. Numerous Welsh banks issued
their own banknotes in the 19th century. The last bank to do so closed in 1908;
since then, although banks in Scotland and Northern Ireland continue to have the
right to issue banknotes in their own countries, the Bank of England has a
monopoly on the issue of banknotes in Wales. The Commercial Bank of Wales,
established in Cardiff by Sir Julian Hodge in 1971, was taken over by the Bank
of Scotland in 1988 and absorbed into its parent company in 2002. The Royal
Mint, who issue the coinage circulated through the whole of the UK, have been
based at a single site in Llantrisant since 1980. Since decimalisation, in 1971,
at least one of the coins in UK circulation has depicted a Welsh design, e.g.
the 1995 and 2000 one Pound coin (above). However, Wales has not been
represented on any coin minted from 2008.

The main road artery along the south Wales coast is the M4 motorway. It also
provides a link to southern England, terminating in London. The section of the
motorway managed by the Welsh Government runs from the Second Severn Crossing to
Pont Abraham, Carmarthenshire, connecting the cities of Newport, Cardiff and
Swansea. The A55 expressway has a similar role along the north Wales coast,
connecting Holyhead and Bangor with Wrexham and Flintshire. It also links to
north-west England, principally Chester. The main north-south Wales link is the
A470, which runs from Cardiff to Llandudno.

Cardiff International Airport is the only large and international airport in
Wales. Providing links to European, African and North American destinations, it
is about 12 miles (19 km) southwest of Cardiff city centre, in the Vale of
Glamorgan. Intra-Wales flights run between Anglesey (Valley) and Cardiff,
operated by Isle of Man airline Manx2 Other internal flights operate to northern
England, Scotland and Northern Ireland.

The Welsh Government manages those parts of the British railway network within
Wales. Cardiff Central is Wales' busiest railway station, with over four times
as much passenger traffic as any other station in Wales. The Cardiff region has
its own urban rail network. Beeching cuts in the 1960s mean that most of the
remaining network is geared toward east-west travel connecting with the Irish
Sea ports for ferries to Ireland. Services between north and south Wales operate
through the English towns of Chester and Shrewsbury along the Welsh Marches
Line. All trains in Wales are diesel-powered, since no lines have been
electrified. However, the South Wales Main Line branch of the Great Western Main
Line used by services from London Paddington to Cardiff and Swansea, is
undergoing electrification.

Wales has four commercial ferry ports. Regular ferry services to Ireland operate
from Holyhead, Pembroke and Fishguard. The Swansea to Cork service, cancelled in
2006, was reinstated in March 2010, but has been withdrawn again in 2012.

A distinct education system has developed in Wales. Formal education before the
18th century was the preserve of the elite. The first grammar schools were
established in Welsh towns such as Ruthin, Brecon and Cowbridge. One of the
first successful schooling systems was started by Griffith Jones, who introduced
the circulating schools in the 1730s; believed to have taught half the country's
population to read. In the 19th century, with increasing state involvement in
education, Wales was forced to adopt an education system that was English in
ethos even though the country was predominantly Non-conformist, Welsh-speaking
and demographically uneven because of the economic expansion in the south. In
some schools, to ensure Welsh children spoke English at school, the Welsh Not
was used; a policy seen as a hated symbol of English oppression. The "not", a
piece of wood hung round the neck by string, was given to any child overheard
speaking Welsh, who would pass it to a different child if overheard speaking
Welsh. At the end of the day, the wearer of the "not" would be beaten. The
extent of its practice, however, is difficult to determine. State and local
governmental edicts resulted in schooling in the English language which,
following Brad y Llyfrau Gleision (the Treachery of the Blue Books), was seen as
more academic and worthwhile for children.

The University College of Wales opened in Aberystwyth in 1872. Cardiff and
Bangor followed, and the three colleges came together in 1893 to form the
University of Wales. The Welsh Intermediate Education Act of 1889 created 95
secondary schools. The Welsh Department for the Board of Education followed in
1907, which gave Wales its first significant educational devolution. A
resurgence in Welsh-language schools in the latter half of the 20th century at
nursery and primary level saw attitudes shift towards teaching in the medium of
Welsh. In schools where English is the first language, Welsh is a compulsory
subject until the age of 16. While there has never been an exclusively
Welsh-language college, Welsh-medium higher education is delivered through the
individual universities and has since 2011 been supported by the Coleg Cymraeg
Cenedlaethol (Welsh National College) as a delocalised federal institution. In
2006 there were 33 nursery, 1555 primary, 244 secondary comprehensive and 43
special schools with 56 independent schools in Wales. In 2004 the country had
505,208 pupils taught by 27,378 teachers.

Public healthcare in Wales is provided by NHS Wales (GIG Cymru), which was
originally formed as part of the NHS structure for England and Wales created by
the National Health Service Act 1946, but with powers over the NHS in Wales
coming under the Secretary of State for Wales in 1969. In turn, responsibility
for NHS Wales was passed to the Welsh Assembly and Executive under devolution in
1999. Historically, Wales was served by smaller 'cottage' hospitals, built as
voluntary institutions. As newer more expensive diagnostic techniques and
treatments became available through medical advancement, much of the clinical
work of the country has been concentrated in newer, larger district hospitals.
In 2006, there were seventeen district hospitals in Wales, although none
situated in Powys. NHS Wales provides public healthcare in Wales and employs
some 90,000 staff, making it Wales’ biggest employer. The Minister for Health
and Social Services is the person within the Welsh Government who holds cabinet
responsibilities for both health and social care in Wales.

A 2009 Welsh health survey, conducted by the Welsh Assembly, reported that 51%
of adults reported their health good or excellent, while 21% described their
health as fair or poor. The survey also recorded that 27% of Welsh adults had a
long-term chronic illness, such as arthritis, asthma, diabetes and heart
disease. Enquiries into health-related lifestyle choices report 27% of the adult
population are smokers, 45% admit drinking alcohol above recommended guidelines
at least once a week, while 29% undertake the recommended weekly physical
activity.

Source: John Davies (1993). A History of Wales. pp. 258–59, 319. ; Census 2001,
200 Years of the Census in ... Wales (2001)

The population of Wales doubled from 587,000 in 1801 to 1,163,000 in 1851 and
had reached 2,421,000 by 1911. Most of the increase came in the coal mining
districts, especially Glamorganshire, which grew from 71,000 in 1801 to 232,000
in 1851 and 1,122,000 in 1911. Part of this increase can be attributed to the
demographic transition seen in most industrialising countries during the
Industrial Revolution, as death rates dropped and birth rates remained steady.
However, there was also large-scale migration into Wales during the Industrial
Revolution. The English were the most numerous group, but there were also
considerable numbers of Irish and smaller numbers of other ethnic groups,
including Italians, who migrated to South Wales. Wales also received immigration
from various parts of the British Commonwealth of Nations in the 20th century,
and African-Caribbean and Asian communities add to the ethno-cultural mix,
particularly in urban Wales. Many of these self-identify as Welsh.

The 2011 census showed Wales' population to be 3,063,456, the highest in its
history. In 2011, 27% (837,000) of the total population of Wales were not born
in Wales, including 636,000 people (21% of the total population of Wales) who
were born in England. The main population and industrial areas are in south
Wales, including the cities of Cardiff, Swansea and Newport and the nearby
valleys, with another significant population in the north-east around Wrexham
and Flintshire.

According to the 2001 census, 96% of the population was White British, and 2.1%
non-white (mainly of British Asian origin). Most non-white groups were
concentrated in Cardiff, Newport and Swansea. Welsh Asian and African
communities developed mainly through immigration after the Second World War. In
the early 21st century, parts of Wales saw an increased number of immigrants
settle from recent EU accession countries such as Poland; though a 2007 study
showed a relatively low number of employed immigrant workers from the former
Eastern Bloc countries in Wales compared to other regions of the United Kingdom.

The 2001 UK census was criticised in Wales for not offering 'Welsh' as an option
to describe respondents' national identity. Partly to address this concern, the
2011 census asked the question "How would you describe your national identity?".
Respondents were instructed to "tick all that apply" from a list of options that
included Welsh. The outcome was that 57.5% of Wales' population indicated their
sole national identity to be Welsh; a further 7.1% indicated it to be both Welsh
and British. No Welsh national identity was indicated by 34.1%. The proportion
giving their sole national identity as British was 16.9%, and another 9.4%
included British with another national identity. No British national identity
was indicated by 73.7%. 11.2% indicated their sole national identity as English
and another 2.6% included English with another national identity.

The 2011 census showed Wales to be less ethnically diverse than any region of
England: 93.2% classed themselves as White British (including Welsh, English,
Scottish or Northern Irish), 2.4% as "Other White" (including Irish), 2.2% as
Asian (including Asian British), 1% as Mixed, and 0.6% as Black (African,
Caribbean, or Black British). The lowest proportion of White British (80.3%) was
in Cardiff.

In 2001, a quarter of the Welsh population were born outside Wales, mainly in
England; about 3% were born outside the UK. The proportion born in Wales varies
across the country, with the highest percentages in the south Wales valleys and
the lowest in mid Wales and parts of the north-east. In both Blaenau Gwent and
Merthyr Tydfil, 92% were Welsh-born, compared to only 51% and 56% in the border
counties of Flintshire and Powys. Just over 1.75 million Americans report
themselves to have Welsh ancestry, as did 440,965 Canadians in Canada's 2006
census.

The total fertility rate (TFR) in Wales was 1.90 in 2011, which is below the
replacement rate of 2.1. The majority of births are to unmarried women (58% of
births in 2011 were outside marriage). About one in 10 births (10.7%) in 2011
were to foreign-born mothers, compared to 5.2% in 2001.

A 2010 study estimated that 35% of the Welsh population have surnames of Welsh
origin (5.4% of the English and 1.6% of the Scottish population also bore
'Welsh' names). However, many modern surnames derived from old Welsh personal
names actually arose in England.

In his 1707 work Archaeologia Britannica Edward Lhuyd, keeper of the Ashmolean
Museum, noted the similarity between the two Celtic language families: Brythonic
or P–Celtic (Breton, Cornish and Welsh); and Goidelic or Q–Celtic (Irish, Manx
and Scottish Gaelic). He argued that the Brythonic languages originated in Gaul
(France), and that the Goidelic languages originated in the Iberian Peninsula.
Lhuyd concluded that as the languages had been of Celtic origin, the people who
spoke those languages were Celts. (According to a more recent hypothesis, also
widely embraced today, Goidelic and Brythonic languages, collectively known as
Insular Celtic languages, evolved together for some time separately from
Continental Celtic languages such as Gaulish and Celtiberian.) From the 18th
century, the peoples of Brittany, Cornwall, Ireland, Isle of Man, Scotland and
Wales were known increasingly as Celts, and they are regarded as the modern
Celtic nations today.

The Bible translations into Welsh helped to maintain the use of Welsh in daily
life. The New Testament was translated by William Salesbury in 1567 followed by
the complete Bible by William Morgan in 1588.

The Welsh Language Act 1993 and the Government of Wales Act 1998 provide that
the English and Welsh languages be treated on a basis of equality, and both are
used as working languages within the National Assembly. Both English and Welsh
are considered official languages of Wales, with Welsh further recognised in law
as having "official status". English is spoken by almost all people in Wales and
is the main language in most of the country. Code-switching is common in all
parts of Wales and is known by various terms, though none is recognised by
professional linguists. "Wenglish" is the Welsh English language dialect. It has
been influenced significantly by Welsh grammar and includes words derived from
Welsh. According to John Davies, Wenglish has "been the object of far greater
prejudice than anything suffered by Welsh". Northern and western Wales retain
many areas where Welsh is spoken as a first language by the majority of the
population, and English learnt as a second language. The 2011 Census showed
562,016 people, 19.0% of the Welsh population, were able to speak Welsh, a
decrease from the 20.8% returned in the 2001 census. Although monoglotism in
young children continues, life-long monoglotism in Welsh is recognised to be a
thing of the past.

Road signs in Wales are generally in both English and Welsh; where place names
differ in the two languages, both versions are used (e.g. "Cardiff" and
"Caerdydd"), the decision as to which is placed first being that of the local
authority. During the 20th century, a number of small communities of speakers of
languages other than Welsh or English, such as Bengali or Cantonese, established
themselves in Wales as a result of immigration.

The largest religion in Wales is Christianity, with 57.6% of the population
describing themselves as Christian in the 2011 census. The Church in Wales with
56,000 adherents has the largest attendance of the denominations. It is a
province of the Anglican Communion, and was part of the Church of England until
disestablishment in 1920 under the Welsh Church Act 1914. The first Independent
Church in Wales was founded at Llanvaches in 1638 by William Wroth. The
Presbyterian Church of Wales was born out of the Welsh Methodist revival in the
18th century and seceded from the Church of England in 1811.

The second largest attending faith in Wales is Roman Catholic, with an estimated
43,000 adherents. Non-Christian religions are small in Wales, making up
approximately 2.7% of the population. The 2011 census recorded 32.1% of people
declaring no religion, while 7.6% did not reply to the question. The patron
saint of Wales is Saint David (Dewi Sant), with Saint David's Day (Dydd Gŵyl
Dewi Sant) celebrated annually on 1 March.

In 1904, there was a religious revival (known by some as the 1904–1905 Welsh
Revival, or simply The 1904 Revival) which started through the evangelism of
Evan Roberts and saw large numbers of people converting to nonconformist and
Anglican Christianity, sometimes whole communities. Roberts' style of preaching
became the blueprint for new religious bodies such as Pentecostalism and the
Apostolic Church. The Apostolic Church holds its annual Apostolic Conference in
Swansea each year, usually in August.

Islam is the largest non-Christian religion in Wales, with more than 24,000
(0.8%) reported Muslims in the 2011 census. 2 Glynrhondda Street in Cathays,
Cardiff, is accepted as the first mosque in the United Kingdom founded by Yemeni
and Somali sailors on their trips between Aden and Cardiff Docks.

There are also communities of Hindus and Sikhs, mainly in the south Wales cities
of Newport, Cardiff and Swansea, while the largest concentration of Buddhists is
in the western rural county of Ceredigion. Judaism was the first non-Christian
faith to be established in Wales since Roman times, though by 2001 the community
has declined to approximately 2,000.

Wales has three UNESCO World Heritage Sites: The Castles and Town walls of King
Edward I in Gwynedd; Pontcysyllte Aqueduct; and the Blaenavon Industrial
Landscape.

The remnants of the native Celtic mythology of the pre-Christian Britons was
passed down orally, in much altered form, by the cynfeirdd (the early poets).
Some of their work survives in much later medieval Welsh manuscripts, known as:
the Black Book of Carmarthen and the Book of Aneirin (both 13th-century); the
Book of Taliesin and the White Book of Rhydderch (both 14th-century); and the
Red Book of Hergest (c. 1400). The prose stories from the White and Red Books
are known as the Mabinogion, a title given to them by their first translator,
Lady Charlotte Guest, and also used by subsequent translators. Poems such as Cad
Goddeu (The Battle of the Trees) and mnemonic list-texts like the Welsh Triads
and the Thirteen Treasures of the Island of Britain, also contain mythological
material. These texts also include the earliest forms of the Arthurian legend
and the traditional history of post-Roman Britain.

Other sources of Welsh folklore include the 9th-century Latin historical
compilation Historia Britonum (the History of the Britons) and Geoffrey of
Monmouth's 12th-century Latin chronicle Historia Regum Britanniae (the History
of the Kings of Britain), as well as later folklore, such as The Welsh Fairy
Book by W. Jenkyn Thomas.

Wales can claim one of the oldest unbroken literary traditions in Europe. The
literary tradition of Wales stretches back to the sixth century and includes
Geoffrey of Monmouth and Gerald of Wales, regarded by historian John Davies as
among the finest Latin authors of the Middle Ages. The earliest body of Welsh
verse, by poets Taliesin and Aneirin, survive not in their original form, but in
medieval versions and have undergone significant linguistic changes. Welsh
poetry and native lore and learning survived the Dark Ages, through the era of
the Poets of the Princes (c. 1100 – 1280) and then the Poets of the Gentry (c.
1350 – 1650). The Poets of the Princes were professional poets who composed
eulogies and elegies to the Welsh princes while the Poets of the Gentry were a
school of poets that favoured the cywydd metre. The period is notable for
producing one of Wales' greatest poets, Dafydd ap Gwilym. After the
Anglicisation of the gentry the tradition declined.

Despite the extinction of the professional poet, the integration of the native
elite into a wider cultural world did bring other literary benefits. Humanists
such as William Salesbury and John Davies brought Renaissance ideals from
English universities when they returned to Wales. While in 1588 William Morgan
became the first person to translate the Bible into Welsh, from Greek and
Hebrew. From the 16th century onwards the proliferation of the 'free-metre'
verse became the most important development in Welsh poetry, but from the middle
of the 17th century a host of imported accentual metres from England became very
popular. By the 19th century the creation of a Welsh epic, fuelled by the
eisteddfod, became an obsession with Welsh-language writers. The output of this
period was prolific in quantity but unequal in quality. Initially the eisteddfod
was askance with the religious denominations, but in time these bodies came to
dominate the competitions, with the bardic themes becoming increasingly
scriptural and didactic. The period is notable for the adoption by Welsh poets
of bardic names, made popular by the eisteddfod movement.

Major developments in 19th-century Welsh literature include Lady Charlotte
Guest's translation of the Mabinogion, one of the most important medieval Welsh
prose tales of Celtic mythology, into English. 1885 saw the publication of Rhys
Lewis by Daniel Owen, credited as the first novel written in the Welsh language.
The 20th century experienced an important shift away from the stilted and
long-winded Victorian Welsh prose, with Thomas Gwynn Jones leading the way with
his 1902 work Ymadawiad Arthur. The slaughter in the trenches of the First World
War had a profound effect on Welsh literature with a more pessimistic style of
prose championed by T. H. Parry-Williams and R. Williams Parry. The
industrialisation of south Wales saw a further shift with the likes of Rhydwen
Williams who used the poetry and metre of a bygone rural Wales but in the
context of an industrial landscape. Though the inter-war period is dominated by
Saunders Lewis, for his political and reactionary views as much as his plays,
poetry and criticism.

The careers of some 1930s writers continued after World War Two, including those
of Gwyn Thomas, Vernon Watkins, and Dylan Thomas, whose most famous work Under
Milk Wood was first broadcast in 1954. Thomas was one of the most notable and
popular Welsh writers of the 20th century and one of the most innovative poets
of his time. Gwyn Thomas became the voice of the English-speaking Welsh valleys
with his humorous take on grim lives.

The attitude of the post-war generation of Welsh writers in English towards
Wales differs from the previous generation, in that they were more sympathetic
to Welsh nationalism and to the Welsh language. The change can be linked to the
nationalist fervour generated by Saunders Lewis and the burning of the Bombing
School on the Lleyn Peninsula in 1936, along with a sense of crisis generated by
World War II. In poetry R. S. Thomas (1913–2000) was the most important figure
throughout the second half of the twentieth century. While he "did not learn the
Welsh language until he was 30 and wrote all his poems in English", he wanted
the Welsh language to be made the first language of Wales, and the official
policy of bilingualism abolished.

The major novelist in the second half of the twentieth century was Emyr
Humphreys (1919)., who during his long writing career published over twenty
novels, which surveys the political and cultural history of twentieth-century
Wales. Another novelist of the post-Second-World-War era was Raymond Williams
(1921–88). Born near Abergavenny, Williams continued the earlier tradition of
writing from a left-wing perspective on the Welsh industrial scene in his
trilogy "Border Country" (1960), "Second Generation" (1964), and "The Fight for
Manod" (1979). He also enjoyed a reputation as a cultural historian.

The National Museum [of] Wales was founded by royal charter in 1907 and is now a
Welsh Government sponsored body. The National Museum is made up of seven sites
across the country, including the National Museum Cardiff, St Fagans National
History Museum and Big Pit National Coal Museum. In April 2001, the attractions
attached to the National Museum were granted free entry by the Assembly, and
this action saw the visitor numbers to the sites increase during 2001–2002 by
87.8% to 1,430,428.

Aberystwyth is home to the National Library of Wales, which houses some of the
most important collections in Wales, including the John William's Library and
the Shirburn Castle collection. As well as its printed collection the Library
holds important Welsh art collections including portraits and photographs,
ephemera such as postcards, posters and Ordnance Survey maps.

Many works of Celtic art have been found in Wales. In the Early Medieval period,
the Celtic Christianity of Wales was part of the Insular art of the British
Isles. A number of illuminated manuscripts from Wales survive, of which the 8th
century Hereford Gospels and Lichfield Gospels are the most notable. The 11th
century Ricemarch Psalter (now in Dublin) is certainly Welsh, made in St
David's, and shows a late Insular style with unusual Viking influence.

The best of the few Welsh artists of the 16th–18th centuries tended to leave the
country to work, many of them moving to London or Italy. Richard Wilson
(1714–82) is arguably the first major British landscapist. Although more notable
for his Italian scenes, he painted several Welsh scenes on visits from London.
By the late 18th century, the popularity of landscape art grew and clients were
found in the larger Welsh towns, allowing more Welsh artists to stay in their
homeland. Artists from outside Wales were also drawn to paint Welsh scenery, at
first because of the Celtic Revival. Then in the early 19th century, the
Napoleonic Wars preventing the Grand Tour to continental Europe, travel through
Wales came to be considered more accessible.

An Act of Parliament in 1857 provided for the establishment of a number of art
schools throughout the United Kingdom and the Cardiff School of Art opened in
1865. Graduates still very often had to leave Wales to work, but Betws-y-Coed
became a popular centre for artists and its artists' colony helped form the
Royal Cambrian Academy of Art in 1881. The sculptor Sir William Goscombe John
made many works for Welsh commissions, although he had settled in London.
Christopher Williams, whose subjects were mostly resolutely Welsh, was also
based in London. Thomas E. Stephens and Andrew Vicari had very successful
careers as portraitists based respectively in the United States and France. Sir
Frank Brangwyn was Welsh by origin but spent little time in Wales.

Many Welsh painters gravitated towards the art capitals of Europe. Augustus John
and his sister Gwen John lived mostly in London and Paris. However, the
landscapists Sir Kyffin Williams and Peter Prendergast lived in Wales for most
of their lives, while remaining in touch with the wider art world. Ceri Richards
was very engaged in the Welsh art scene as a teacher in Cardiff and even after
moving to London. He was a figurative painter in international styles including
Surrealism. Various artists have moved to Wales, including Eric Gill, the
London-Welshman David Jones and the sculptor Jonah Jones. The Kardomah Gang was
an intellectual circle centred on the poet Dylan Thomas and poet and artist
Vernon Watkins in Swansea, which also included the painter Alfred Janes.

South Wales had several notable potteries, one of the first important sites
being the Ewenny Pottery in Bridgend, which began producing earthenware in the
17th century. In the 18th and 19th centuries, with more scientific methods
becoming available more refined ceramics were produced led by the Cambrian
Pottery (1764–1870, also known as "Swansea pottery") and later Nantgarw Pottery
near Cardiff, which was in operation from 1813 to 1822 making fine porcelain and
then utilitarian pottery until 1920. Portmeirion Pottery, founded in 1960 by
Susan Williams-Ellis, daughter of Clough Williams-Ellis, creator of the
Italianate village of Portmeirion, Gwynedd, is based in Stoke-on-Trent, England.

The Flag of Wales incorporates the red dragon (Y Ddraig Goch) of Prince
Cadwalader along with the Tudor colours of green and white. It was used by Henry
VII at the Battle of Bosworth in 1485 after which it was carried in state to St.
Paul's Cathedral. The red dragon was then included in the Tudor royal arms to
signify their Welsh descent. It was officially recognised as the Welsh national
flag in 1959. The British Union Flag incorporates the flags of Scotland, Ireland
and England, but has no Welsh representation. Technically Wales is represented
by the flag of England, as the Laws in Wales Act of 1535 annexed Wales to
England, following the 13th-century conquest.

The daffodil and the leek are also symbols of Wales. The origins of the leek can
be traced to the 16th century, while the daffodil became popular in the 19th
century, encouraged by David Lloyd-George. This is attributed to confusion (or
association) between the Welsh for leek, cenhinen, and that for daffodil,
cenhinen Bedr or St. Peter's leek. A report in 1916 gave preference to the leek,
which has appeared on British pound coins.

The Prince of Wales' heraldic badge is also sometimes used to symbolise Wales.
The badge, known as the Prince of Wales's feathers, consists of three white
feathers emerging from a gold coronet. A ribbon below the coronet bears the
German motto Ich dien (I serve). Several Welsh representative teams, including
the Welsh rugby union, and Welsh regiments in the British Army (the Royal Welsh,
for example) use the badge, or a stylised version of it. The Prince of Wales has
claimed that only he has the authority to use the symbol.

"Hen Wlad fy Nhadau" (English: Land of My Fathers) is the National Anthem of
Wales, and is played at events such as football or rugby matches involving the
Wales national team as well as the opening of the Welsh Assembly and other
official occasions. "God Save the Queen", the national anthem of the United
Kingdom, is sometimes played alongside Hen Wlad fy Nhadau during official events
with a royal connection.

More than 50 national governing bodies regulate and organise their sports in
Wales. Most of those involved in competitive sports select, organise and manage
individuals or teams to represent their country at international events or
fixtures against other countries. Wales is represented at major world sporting
events such as the FIFA World Cup, Rugby World Cup, Rugby League World Cup and
the Commonwealth Games. At the Olympics Games, Welsh athletes compete alongside
those of Scotland, England and Northern Ireland as part of a Great Britain team.

Although football has traditionally been the more popular sport in north Wales,
rugby union is seen as a symbol of Welsh identity and an expression of national
consciousness. The Wales national rugby union team takes part in the annual Six
Nations Championship and has also competed in every Rugby World Cup, hosting the
tournament in 1999. The five professional sides that replaced the traditional
club sides in major competitions in 2003 were replaced in 2004 by the four
regions: Scarlets; Cardiff Blues; Newport Gwent Dragons; and the Ospreys. The
Welsh regional teams play in the Pro12, the Anglo-Welsh Cup, the European Rugby
Champions Cup and the European Rugby Challenge Cup.

Wales has had its own football league, the Welsh Premier League, since 1992. For
historical reasons, six Welsh clubs play in the English football league system;
Cardiff City, Swansea City, Newport County, Wrexham, Colwyn Bay and Merthyr
Town. Famous Welsh players over the years include John Charles, John Toshack,
Ian Rush, Ryan Giggs and Gareth Bale.

Rugby league in Wales dates back to 1907. Currently two professional clubs, the
South Wales Ironmen (based in Merthyr Tydfil) and the North Wales Crusaders
(based in Wrexham) compete in the Rugby Football League's League 1 competition.
The Crusaders competed in the top level Super League competition from 2009-2011.
A professional Welsh League existed from 1908 to 1910.

In international cricket, Wales and England field a single representative team,
administered by the England and Wales Cricket Board (ECB), called the England
cricket team, or simply 'England'. Occasionally, a separate Wales team play
limited-overs competitions. Glamorgan County Cricket Club is the only Welsh
participant in the England and Wales County Championship.

Wales has produced several world-class participants of individual sports
including snooker players Ray Reardon, Terry Griffiths, Mark Williams and
Matthew Stevens. Track athletes who have made a mark on the world stage,
including the 110-metre hurdler Colin Jackson who is a former world record
holder and the winner of numerous Olympic, World and European medals as well as
Tanni Grey-Thompson who has won 11 Paralympic gold medals. Cyclist Nicole Cooke
won gold medals at the Commonwealth, Olympic and World championships.

Wales also has a tradition of producing world-class boxers. Joe Calzaghe was WBO
world super-middleweight champion and then won the WBA, WBC and Ring Magazine
super middleweight and Ring Magazine light-heavyweight titles. Other former
boxing world champions include Enzo Maccarinelli, Freddie Welsh, Howard
Winstone, Percy Jones, Jimmy Wilde, Steve Robinson and Robbie Regan. Tommy Farr,
the "Tonypandy Terror", came close to defeating world heavyweight champion Joe
Louis at the height of his fame in 1937.

Wales has hosted several international sporting events. These include the 1958
Commonwealth Games, the 1999 Rugby World Cup and the 2010 Ryder Cup.

All Welsh television broadcasts are digital. The last of the analogue
transmitters ceased broadcasts in April 2010, and Wales became the UK's first
digital nation. Cardiff is home to the television output of Wales. BBC Cymru
Wales is the national broadcaster. Based in Llandaff, Cardiff, it produces
Welsh-oriented English and Welsh-language television for BBC ONE Wales, BBC TWO
Wales and S4C channels. BBC Cymru Wales has also produced programmes, such as
Life on Mars, Doctor Who and Torchwood, shown worldwide. ITV the UK's main
commercial broadcaster has a Welsh-oriented service branded as ITV Wales, whose
studios are in Culverhouse Cross, Cardiff. S4C, based in Llanishen, Cardiff,
first broadcast on 1 November 1982. Its output was mostly Welsh-language at peak
hours, but shared English-language content with Channel 4 at other times. Since
the digital switchover in April 2010, the channel has broadcast exclusively in
Welsh. BBC Cymru Wales provide S4C with ten hours of programming per week. Their
remaining output is commissioned from ITV and independent producers.

BBC Cymru Wales is Wales' only national radio broadcaster. BBC Radio Wales is
their English-language radio service, broadcasting throughout Wales in English.
BBC Radio Cymru is their Welsh-language radio service, broadcasting throughout
Wales in Welsh. A number of independent radio stations broadcast to the Welsh
regions, predominantly in English. Several regional radio stations broadcast in
Welsh: output ranges from two, two-minute news bulletins each weekday (Radio
Maldwyn), through over 14 hours of Welsh-language programmes weekly (Swansea
Sound), to essentially bilingual stations offering between 37% and 44% of
programme content (Heart Cymru (formerly Champion 103) and Radio Ceredigion
respectively).

Most of the newspapers sold and read in Wales are national newspapers available
throughout Britain, unlike in Scotland where many newspapers have rebranded into
Scottish-based titles. The Western Mail is Wales' only national daily newspaper.
Wales-based regional daily newspapers include: Daily Post (which covers north
Wales); South Wales Evening Post (Swansea); South Wales Echo (Cardiff); and
South Wales Argus (Newport). Y Cymro is a Welsh-language newspaper, published
weekly. Wales on Sunday is the only Welsh Sunday newspaper to cover the whole of
Wales.

The Welsh Books Council (WBC) is the Welsh Government funded body tasked with
promoting Welsh literature. The WBC provides publishing grants for qualifying
English- and Welsh-language publications. Around 600–650 books are published
each year, by some of the dozens of Welsh publishers. Wales' main publishing
houses include Gomer Press, Gwasg Carreg Gwalch, Honno, the University of Wales
Press and Y Lolfa.

Magazines published in Welsh and English cover general and specialist subjects.
Cambria, a Welsh affairs magazine published bi-monthly in English, has
subscribers in over 30 countries. Titles published quarterly in English include
Planet and Poetry Wales. Welsh-language magazines include the current affairs
titles Golwg (View) (published weekly) and Barn (Opinion) (monthly). Among the
specialist magazines, Y Wawr (The Dawn) is published quarterly by Merched y
Wawr, the national organisation for women. Y Traethodydd (The Essayist), a
quarterly publication by The Presbyterian Church of Wales, first appeared in
1845; the oldest Welsh publication still in print.

About 78% of the land surface of Wales is given over to agricultural use.
However, very little of this is arable land; the vast majority consists of
permanent grass pasture or rough grazing for herd animals such as sheep and
cows. Although both beef and dairy cattle are raised widely, especially in
Carmarthenshire and Pembrokeshire, Wales is more well known for its sheep
farming and thus lamb is the meat traditionally associated with Welsh cooking.

Traditional dishes include laverbread (made from laver (Porphyra umbilicalis),
an edible seaweed); bara brith (fruit bread); cawl (a lamb stew); cawl cennin
(leek soup); Welsh cakes; and Welsh lamb. Cockles are sometimes served as a
traditional breakfast with bacon and laverbread.

Although Wales has its own traditional food, and has absorbed much of the
cuisine of England, Welsh diets now owe more to the countries of India, China
and the United States. Chicken tikka masala is the country's favourite dish
while hamburgers and Chinese food outsell fish and chips as a takeaway.

Wales is often referred to as "the land of song", and is notable for its
harpists, male choirs, and solo artists. The principal Welsh festival of music
and poetry is the annual National Eisteddfod. The Llangollen International
Eisteddfod echoes the National Eisteddfod but provides an opportunity for the
singers and musicians of the world to perform. Traditional music and dance in
Wales is supported by a myriad of societies. The Welsh Folk Song Society has
published a number of collections of songs and tunes.

Traditional instruments of Wales include telyn deires (triple harp), fiddle,
crwth, pibgorn (hornpipe) and other instruments. The Cerdd Dant Society promotes
its specific singing art primarily through an annual one-day festival.

The BBC National Orchestra of Wales performs in Wales and internationally. The
Welsh National Opera is based at the Wales Millennium Centre in Cardiff Bay,
while the National Youth Orchestra of Wales was the first of its type in the
world.

Wales has a tradition of producing notable singers, including Sir Geraint Evans,
Dame Gwyneth Jones, Dame Anne Evans, Dame Margaret Price, Sir Tom Jones, Bonnie
Tyler, Bryn Terfel, Mary Hopkin, Charlotte Church, Katherine Jenkins, Meic
Stevens, Dame Shirley Bassey, Marina and the Diamonds and Duffy.

Popular bands that emerged from Wales include the Beatles-nurtured power pop
group Badfinger in the 1960s, Man and Budgie in the 1970s and the Alarm in the
1980s. Many groups emerged during the 1990s, led by Manic Street Preachers,
followed by the likes of the Stereophonics and Feeder; notable during this
period were Catatonia, Super Furry Animals, and Gorky's Zygotic Mynci who gained
popular success as dual-language artists. Recently successful Welsh bands
include Lostprophets, Bullet for My Valentine, Funeral for a Friend and Kids in
Glass Houses. The Welsh traditional and folk music scene is in resurgence with
performers and bands such as Carreg Lafar, Fernhill, Siân James and the
Hennessys.

Male voice choirs emerged in the 19th century and continue today. Originally
these choirs where formed as the tenor and bass sections of chapel choirs, and
embraced the popular secular hymns of the day. Many of the historic choirs
survive in modern Wales, singing a mixture of traditional and popular songs.

The earliest surviving Welsh plays are two medieval miracle plays, Y Tri Brenin
o Gwlen ("The three Kings from Cologne") and Y Dioddefaint a'r Atgyfodiad ("The
Passion and the Resurrection"). A recognised Welsh tradition of theatre emerged
during the 18th century, in the form of an interlude, a metrical play performed
at fairs and markets. The larger Welsh towns began building theatres during the
19th century, and attracted the likes of James Sheridan Knowles and William
Charles Macready to Wales. Along with the playhouses, there existed mobile
companies at visiting fairs, though from 1912 most of these travelling theatres
settled, purchasing theatres to perform in.

Drama in the early 20th century thrived, but the country failed to produce a
Welsh National Theatre company. After the Second World War the substantial
number of amateur companies that had existed before the outbreak of hostilities
reduced by two thirds. The increasing competition from television in the 1950s
and 1960s led to a need for greater professionalism in the theatre. As a result,
plays by Emlyn Williams and Alun Owen and others were staged, while Welsh
actors, including Richard Burton, Rachel Roberts, Donald Houston and Stanley
Baker, were establishing themselves as artistic talents. Anthony Hopkins was an
alumnus of the Royal Welsh College of Music & Drama, and has since starred in
Hollywood films.John Rhys-Davies is another well known actor, famous for his
portrayal of Gimli in The Lord of the Rings trilogy and the charismatic Arab
excavator Sallah in the Indiana Jones films. Other Welsh actors to have crossed
the Atlantic more recently include: Ioan Gruffudd; Rhys Ifans; Matthew Rhys;
Michael Sheen; and Catherine Zeta-Jones.

Wales has also produced well known comedians including Tommy Cooper, Terry
Jones, Harry Secombe, Rhod Gilbert and Paul Whitehouse.

Dancing is a popular pastime in Wales; traditional dances include folk dancing
and clog dancing. The first mention of dancing in Wales is in a 12th-century
account by Giraldus Cambrensis, but by the 19th century traditional dance had
all but died out; this is attributed to the influence of Nonconformists and
their belief that any physical diversion was worthless and satanic, especially
mixed dancing. These ancient dances, orally passed down, were almost
single-handedly rescued by Lois Blake (1890–1974) who recorded them in numerous
instruction pamphlets, recording both steps and music. In a similar vein, clog
dancing was preserved and developed by the likes of Howel Wood (1882–1967) who
perpetuated the art at local and national stages. Clog dancing, traditionally a
male dominated art, is now a common part of eisteddfodau. In 2010, a 30-year
traditional dance festival held in Caernarvon came to an end due to a lack of
participants, though clog dancing has seen a revival in the 21st century.

The Welsh Folk Dance Society was founded in 1949; it supports a network of
national amateur dance teams and publishes support material. Contemporary dance
grew out of Cardiff in the 1970s; one of the earliest companies, Moving Being,
came from London to Cardiff in 1973. Diversions was formed in 1983, eventually
becoming the National Dance Company Wales, now the resident company at the Wales
Millennium Centre. Conversely, Wales does not have its own national ballet
company.

As well as celebrating many of the traditional religious festivals of Great
Britain, such as Easter and Christmas, Wales has its own unique celebratory
days. An early festivity was Mabsant, when local parishes would celebrate the
patron saint of their local church. This celebration died out in the 19th
century, to be replaced by Saint David's Day, which is celebrated on 1 March
throughout Wales, and by Welsh expats around the world.

Commemorating the patron saint of friendship and love, Dydd Santes Dwynwen's
popularity has been increasing recently. It is celebrated on 25 January in a
similar way to St Valentine's Day: by exchanging cards and by holding parties
and concerts.

Calan Gaeaf, associated with the supernatural and the dead, is observed on 1
November (All Saints Day). It has largely been replaced by Hallowe'en. Other
festivities include Calan Mai (May Day), celebrating the beginning of summer;
Calan Awst (Lammas Day); and Gŵyl Fair y Canhwyllau (Candlemas Day).



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_Kingdom

The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, commonly known as the
United Kingdom (UK) or Britain,[note 8] is a sovereign country in western
Europe. Lying off the north-western coast of the European mainland, it includes
the island of Great Britain, the north-eastern part of the island of Ireland,
and many smaller islands. Northern Ireland is the only part of the UK that
shares a land border with another sovereign state‍—‌the Republic of
Ireland.[note 9] Apart from this land border, the UK is surrounded by the
Atlantic Ocean, with the North Sea to its east, the English Channel to its south
and the Celtic Sea to its south-south-west, giving it the 12th-longest coastline
in the world. The Irish Sea lies between Great Britain and Ireland. With an area
of 242,500 square kilometres (93,600 sq mi), the UK is the 78th-largest
sovereign state in the world and the 11th-largest in Europe. It is also the
21st-most populous country, with an estimated 65.1 million inhabitants.
Together, this makes it the fourth-most densely populated country in the
European Union.[note 10]

The United Kingdom is a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary system of
governance. The monarch is Queen Elizabeth II, who has reigned since 6 February
1952. The capital of the UK and its largest city is London, a global city and
financial centre with an urban area population of 10.3 million, the
fourth-largest in Europe and second-largest in the European Union. Other major
urban areas in the UK include the regions of Birmingham, Leeds, Glasgow,
Liverpool and Manchester. The UK consists of four countries—England, Scotland,
Wales and Northern Ireland. The last three have devolved administrations, each
with varying powers, based in their capitals, Edinburgh, Cardiff and Belfast,
respectively. The nearby Isle of Man, Bailiwick of Guernsey and Bailiwick of
Jersey are not part of the United Kingdom, being Crown dependencies with the
British Government responsible for defence and international representation.

The relationships among the countries of the United Kingdom have changed over
time. Wales was annexed by the Kingdom of England under the Laws in Wales Acts
1535 and 1542. A treaty between England and Scotland resulted in 1707 in a
unified Kingdom of Great Britain, which merged in 1801 with the Kingdom of
Ireland to form the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. Five-sixths of
Ireland seceded from the UK in 1922, leaving the present formulation of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.[note 11] There are
fourteen British Overseas Territories. These are the remnants of the British
Empire which, at its height in the 1920s, encompassed almost a quarter of the
world's land mass and was the largest empire in history. British influence can
be observed in the language, culture, and legal systems of many of its former
colonies.

The United Kingdom is a developed country and has the world's fifth-largest
economy by nominal GDP and ninth-largest economy by purchasing power parity. The
UK is considered to have a high-income economy and is categorised as very high
in the Human Development Index, ranking 14th in the world. It was the world's
first industrialised country and the world's foremost power during the 19th and
early 20th centuries. The UK remains a great power with considerable economic,
cultural, military, scientific and political influence internationally. It is a
recognised nuclear weapons state and its military expenditure ranks fourth or
fifth in the world. The UK has been a permanent member of the United Nations
Security Council since its first session in 1946. It has been a leading member
state of the EU and its predecessor, the European Economic Community (EEC),
since 1973. However, on 23 June 2016, a national referendum on the UK's
membership of the EU resulted in a 51.9% vote to exit. The UK is also a member
of the Commonwealth of Nations, the Council of Europe, the G7 finance ministers,
the G7 forum, the G20, NATO, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD), and the World Trade Organization (WTO).

The 1707 Acts of Union declared that the kingdoms of England and Scotland were
"United into One Kingdom by the Name of Great Britain", though the new state is
also referred to in the Acts as the "Kingdom of Great Britain", "United Kingdom
of Great Britain" and "United Kingdom".[note 12] However, the term "United
Kingdom" is only found in informal use during the 18th century and the country
was only occasionally referred to as the "United Kingdom of Great Britain"—its
full official name, from 1707 to 1800, being merely Great Britain, without a
"long form". The Acts of Union 1800 united the Kingdom of Great Britain and the
Kingdom of Ireland in 1801, forming the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland. The name "United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland" was
adopted following the independence of the Irish Free State, and the partition of
Ireland, in 1922, which left Northern Ireland as the only part of the island of
Ireland within the UK.

Although the United Kingdom, as a sovereign state, is a country, England,
Scotland, Wales, and to a lesser degree, Northern Ireland, are also regarded as
countries, though they are not sovereign states. Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland have devolved self-government. The British Prime Minister's website has
used the phrase "countries within a country" to describe the United Kingdom.
Some statistical summaries, such as those for the twelve NUTS 1 regions of the
UK, also refer to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland as "regions". Northern
Ireland is also referred to as a "province". With regard to Northern Ireland,
the descriptive name used "can be controversial, with the choice often revealing
one's political preferences."

The term Britain is often used as synonym for the United Kingdom. The term Great
Britain, by contrast, refers conventionally to the island of Great Britain, or
politically to England, Scotland and Wales in combination. However, it is
sometimes used as a loose synonym for the United Kingdom as a whole. GB and GBR
are the standard country codes for the United Kingdom (see ISO 3166-2 and ISO
3166-1 alpha-3) and are consequently used by international organisations to
refer to the United Kingdom. Additionally, the United Kingdom's Olympic team
competes under the name "Great Britain" or "Team GB".

The adjective British is commonly used to refer to matters relating to the
United Kingdom. The term has no definite legal connotation, but is used in law
to refer to UK citizenship and matters to do with nationality. People of the
United Kingdom use a number of different terms to describe their national
identity and may identify themselves as being British; or as being English,
Scottish, Welsh, Northern Irish, or Irish; or as being both.

In 2006, a new design of British passport was introduced. Its first page shows
the long form name of the state in English, Welsh and Scottish Gaelic. In Welsh,
the long form name of the state is "Teyrnas Unedig Prydain Fawr a Gogledd
Iwerddon" with "Teyrnas Unedig" being used as a short form name on government
websites, however, it is usually abbreviated to "DU" for the mutated form "Y
Deyrnas Unedig". In Scottish Gaelic, the long form is "Rìoghachd Aonaichte
Bhreatainn is Èireann a Tuath" and the short form "Rìoghachd Aonaichte".

Settlement by anatomically modern humans of what was to become the United
Kingdom occurred in waves beginning by about 30,000 years ago. By the end of the
region's prehistoric period, the population is thought to have belonged, in the
main, to a culture termed Insular Celtic, comprising Brythonic Britain and
Gaelic Ireland. The Roman conquest, beginning in 43 AD, and the 400-year rule of
southern Britain, was followed by an invasion by Germanic Anglo-Saxon settlers,
reducing the Brythonic area mainly to what was to become Wales and the historic
Kingdom of Strathclyde. Most of the region settled by the Anglo-Saxons became
unified as the Kingdom of England in the 10th century. Meanwhile,
Gaelic-speakers in north-west Britain (with connections to the north-east of
Ireland and traditionally supposed to have migrated from there in the 5th
century) united with the Picts to create the Kingdom of Scotland in the 9th
century.

In 1066, the Normans invaded England from France and after its conquest, seized
large parts of Wales, conquered much of Ireland and were invited to settle in
Scotland, bringing to each country feudalism on the Northern French model and
Norman-French culture. The Norman elites greatly influenced, but eventually
assimilated with, each of the local cultures. Subsequent medieval English kings
completed the conquest of Wales and made an unsuccessful attempt to annex
Scotland. Following the Declaration of Arbroath, Scotland maintained its
independence, albeit in near-constant conflict with England. The English
monarchs, through inheritance of substantial territories in France and claims to
the French crown, were also heavily involved in conflicts in France, most
notably the Hundred Years War, while the Kings of Scots were in an alliance with
the French during this period.

The early modern period saw religious conflict resulting from the Reformation
and the introduction of Protestant state churches in each country. Wales was
fully incorporated into the Kingdom of England, and Ireland was constituted as a
kingdom in personal union with the English crown. In what was to become Northern
Ireland, the lands of the independent Catholic Gaelic nobility were confiscated
and given to Protestant settlers from England and Scotland.

In 1603, the kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland were united in a personal
union when James VI, King of Scots, inherited the crowns of England and Ireland
and moved his court from Edinburgh to London; each country nevertheless remained
a separate political entity and retained its separate political, legal, and
religious institutions.

In the mid-17th century, all three kingdoms were involved in a series of
connected wars (including the English Civil War) which led to the temporary
overthrow of the monarchy and the establishment of the short-lived unitary
republic of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland. During the 17th
and 18th centuries, British sailors were involved in acts of piracy
(privateering), attacking and stealing from ships off the coast of Europe and
the Caribbean.

Although the monarchy was restored, the Interregnum ensured (along with the
Glorious Revolution of 1688 and the subsequent Bill of Rights 1689, and the
Claim of Right Act 1689) that, unlike much of the rest of Europe, royal
absolutism would not prevail, and a professed Catholic could never accede to the
throne. The British constitution would develop on the basis of constitutional
monarchy and the parliamentary system. With the founding of the Royal Society in
1660, science was greatly encouraged. During this period, particularly in
England, the development of naval power (and the interest in voyages of
discovery) led to the acquisition and settlement of overseas colonies,
particularly in North America.

On 1 May 1707, the united Kingdom of Great Britain came into being, the result
of Acts of Union being passed by the parliaments of England and Scotland to
ratify the 1706 Treaty of Union and so unite the two kingdoms.

In the 18th century, cabinet government developed under Robert Walpole, in
practice the first prime minister (1721–1742). A series of Jacobite Uprisings
sought to remove the Protestant House of Hanover from the British throne and
restore the Catholic House of Stuart. The Jacobites were finally defeated at the
Battle of Culloden in 1746, after which the Scottish Highlanders were brutally
suppressed. The British colonies in North America that broke away from Britain
in the American War of Independence became the United States of America,
recognised by Britain in 1783. British imperial ambition turned elsewhere,
particularly to India.

During the 18th century, Britain was involved in the Atlantic slave trade.
British ships transported an estimated two million slaves from Africa to the
West Indies before banning the trade in 1807, banning slavery in 1833, and
taking a leading role in the movement to abolish slavery worldwide by pressing
other nations to end their trade with a series of treaties, and then formed the
world's oldest international human rights organisation, Anti-Slavery
International, in London in 1839. The term "United Kingdom" became official in
1801 when the parliaments of Britain and Ireland each passed an Act of Union,
uniting the two kingdoms and creating the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland.

In the early 19th century, the British-led Industrial Revolution began to
transform the country. Gradually political power shifted away from the old Tory
and Whig landowning classes towards the new industrialists. An alliance of
merchants and industrialists with the Whigs would lead to a new party, the
Liberals, with an ideology of free trade and laissez-faire. In 1832 Parliament
passed the Great Reform Act, which began the transfer of political power from
the aristocracy to the middle classes. In the countryside, enclosure of the land
was driving small farmers out. Towns and cities began to swell with a new urban
working class. Few ordinary workers had the vote, and they created their own
organisations in the form of trade unions.[citation needed]

After the defeat of France at the end of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars
(1792–1815), the UK emerged as the principal naval and imperial power of the
19th century (with London the largest city in the world from about 1830).
Unchallenged at sea, British dominance was later described as Pax Britannica
("British Peace"), a period of relative peace in Europe and the world
(1815–1914) during which the British Empire became the global hegemon and
adopted the role of global policeman. By the time of the Great Exhibition of
1851, Britain was described as the "workshop of the world". The British Empire
was expanded to include India, large parts of Africa and many other territories
throughout the world. Alongside the formal control it exerted over its own
colonies, British dominance of much of world trade meant that it effectively
controlled the economies of many regions, such as Asia and Latin America.
Domestically, political attitudes favoured free trade and laissez-faire policies
and a gradual widening of the voting franchise. During the century, the
population increased at a dramatic rate, accompanied by rapid urbanisation,
causing significant social and economic stresses. To seek new markets and
sources of raw materials, the Conservative Party under Disraeli launched a
period of imperialist expansion in Egypt, South Africa, and elsewhere. Canada,
Australia, and New Zealand became self-governing dominions. After the turn of
the century, the UK's industrial monopoly was challenged by Germany and the
United States.[citation needed]

Social reform and home rule for Ireland were important domestic issues after
1900. The Labour Party emerged from an alliance of trade unions and small
Socialist groups in 1900, and suffragettes campaigned for women's right to vote
before 1914.

The UK fought with France, Russia and (after 1917) the US, against Germany and
its allies in the First World War (1914–18). The UK armed forces were engaged
across much of the British Empire and in several regions of Europe, particularly
on the Western front. The high fatalities of trench warfare caused the loss of
much of a generation of men, with lasting social effects in the nation and a
great disruption in the social order.[citation needed]

After the war, the UK received the League of Nations mandate over a number of
former German and Ottoman colonies. The British Empire reached its greatest
extent, covering a fifth of the world's land surface and a quarter of its
population. However, the UK had suffered 2.5 million casualties and finished the
war with a huge national debt.

The rise of Irish nationalism, and disputes within Ireland over the terms of
Irish Home Rule, led eventually to the partition of the island in 1921. The
Irish Free State became independent with Dominion status in 1922. Northern
Ireland remained part of the United Kingdom. A wave of strikes in the mid-1920s
culminated in the UK General Strike of 1926. The UK had still not recovered from
the effects of the war when the Great Depression (1929–32) occurred. This led to
considerable unemployment and hardship in the old industrial areas, as well as
political and social unrest in the 1930s, with rising membership in communist
and socialist parties. A coalition government was formed in 1931.

The UK entered the Second World War by declaring war on Germany in 1939, after
the Nazi regime had invaded Poland and Czechoslovakia. Winston Churchill became
prime minister and head of a coalition government in 1940. Despite the defeat of
its European allies in the first year of the war, the UK continued the fight
alone against Germany. In 1940, the RAF defeated the German Luftwaffe in a
struggle for control of the skies in the Battle of Britain. The UK suffered
heavy bombing during the Blitz. There were also eventual hard-fought victories
in the Battle of the Atlantic, the North Africa campaign and Burma campaign. UK
forces played an important role in the Normandy landings of 1944, achieved with
its ally the US.[citation needed]

After the end of the Second World War in 1945, the UK was one of the Big Four
powers (the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, the US and China) who met to plan
the post-war world; it was an original signatory to the Declaration of the
United Nations. The UK became one of the five permanent members of the United
Nations Security Council. However, the war left the UK severely weakened and
depending financially on the Marshall Plan. In the immediate post-war years, the
Labour government initiated a radical programme of reforms, which had a
significant effect on British society in the following decades. Major industries
and public utilities were nationalised, a welfare state was established, and a
comprehensive, publicly funded healthcare system, the National Health Service,
was created. The rise of nationalism in the colonies coincided with Britain's
now much-diminished economic position, so that a policy of decolonisation was
unavoidable. Independence was granted to India and Pakistan in 1947. Over the
next three decades, most colonies of the British Empire gained their
independence. Many became members of the Commonwealth of Nations.

Although the UK was the third country to develop a nuclear weapons arsenal (with
its first atomic bomb test in 1952), the new post-war limits of Britain's
international role were illustrated by the Suez Crisis of 1956. The
international spread of the English language ensured the continuing
international influence of its literature and culture. As a result of a shortage
of workers in the 1950s, the government encouraged immigration from Commonwealth
countries. In the following decades, the UK became a more multi-ethnic society
than before. Despite rising living standards in the late 1950s and 1960s, the
UK's economic performance was not as successful as many of its competitors, such
as West Germany and Japan.[citation needed]

In the decade-long process of European integration, the UK was a founding member
of the alliance called the Western European Union, established with the London
and Paris Conferences in 1954. In 1960 the UK was one of the seven founding
members of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), but in 1973 it left to
join the European Communities (EC). When the EC became the European Union (EU)
in 1992, the UK was one of the 12 founding members. The Treaty of Lisbon was
signed in 2007, which forms the constitutional basis of the European Union since
then.[citation needed]

From the late 1960s, Northern Ireland suffered communal and paramilitary
violence (sometimes affecting other parts of the UK) conventionally known as the
Troubles. It is usually considered to have ended with the Belfast "Good Friday"
Agreement of 1998.

Following a period of widespread economic slowdown and industrial strife in the
1970s, the Conservative government of the 1980s under Margaret Thatcher
initiated a radical policy of monetarism, deregulation, particularly of the
financial sector (for example, Big Bang in 1986) and labour markets, the sale of
state-owned companies (privatisation), and the withdrawal of subsidies to
others. This resulted in high unemployment and social unrest, but ultimately
also economic growth, particularly in the services sector. From 1984, the
economy was helped by the inflow of substantial North Sea oil revenues.

Around the end of the 20th century there were major changes to the governance of
the UK with the establishment of devolved administrations for Scotland, Wales
and Northern Ireland. The statutory incorporation followed acceptance of the
European Convention on Human Rights. The UK is still a key global player
diplomatically and militarily. It plays leading roles in the EU, UN and NATO.
However, controversy surrounds some of Britain's overseas military deployments,
particularly in Afghanistan and Iraq.

The 2008 global financial crisis severely affected the UK economy. The coalition
government of 2010 introduced austerity measures intended to tackle the
substantial public deficits which resulted. In 2014 the Scottish Government held
a referendum on Scottish independence, with 55% of voters rejecting the
independence proposal and opting to remain within the United Kingdom. In 2016,
the United Kingdom voted to leave the European Union. As a result of this, Prime
Minister David Cameron announced that he would resign; he was replaced by
Theresa May.

The total area of the United Kingdom is approximately 243,610 square kilometres
(94,060 sq mi). The country occupies the major part of the British Isles
archipelago and includes the island of Great Britain, the north-eastern
one-sixth of the island of Ireland and some smaller surrounding islands. It lies
between the North Atlantic Ocean and the North Sea with the south-east coast
coming within 22 miles (35 km) of the coast of northern France, from which it is
separated by the English Channel. In 1993 10% of the UK was forested, 46% used
for pastures and 25% cultivated for agriculture. The Royal Greenwich Observatory
in London is the defining point of the Prime Meridian.

The United Kingdom lies between latitudes 49° to 61° N, and longitudes 9° W to
2° E. Northern Ireland shares a 224-mile (360 km) land boundary with the
Republic of Ireland. The coastline of Great Britain is 11,073 miles (17,820 km)
long. It is connected to continental Europe by the Channel Tunnel, which at 31
miles (50 km) (24 miles (38 km) underwater) is the longest underwater tunnel in
the world.

England accounts for just over half of the total area of the UK, covering
130,395 square kilometres (50,350 sq mi). Most of the country consists of
lowland terrain, with mountainous terrain north-west of the Tees-Exe line;
including the Cumbrian Mountains of the Lake District, the Pennines, Exmoor and
Dartmoor. The main rivers and estuaries are the Thames, Severn and the Humber.
England's highest mountain is Scafell Pike (978 metres (3,209 ft)) in the Lake
District. Its principal rivers are the Severn, Thames, Humber, Tees, Tyne,
Tweed, Avon, Exe and Mersey.

Scotland accounts for just under a third of the total area of the UK, covering
78,772 square kilometres (30,410 sq mi) and including nearly eight hundred
islands, predominantly west and north of the mainland; notably the Hebrides,
Orkney Islands and Shetland Islands. Scotland is the most mountainous country in
the UK and its topography is distinguished by the Highland Boundary Fault—a
geological rock fracture—which traverses Scotland from Arran in the west to
Stonehaven in the east. The faultline separates two distinctively different
regions; namely the Highlands to the north and west and the lowlands to the
south and east. The more rugged Highland region contains the majority of
Scotland's mountainous land, including Ben Nevis which at 1,343 metres
(4,406 ft) is the highest point in the British Isles. Lowland areas—especially
the narrow waist of land between the Firth of Clyde and the Firth of Forth known
as the Central Belt—are flatter and home to most of the population including
Glasgow, Scotland's largest city, and Edinburgh, its capital and political
centre, although upland and mountainous terrain lies within the Southern
Uplands.

Wales accounts for less than a tenth of the total area of the UK, covering
20,779 square kilometres (8,020 sq mi). Wales is mostly mountainous, though
South Wales is less mountainous than North and mid Wales. The main population
and industrial areas are in South Wales, consisting of the coastal cities of
Cardiff, Swansea and Newport, and the South Wales Valleys to their north. The
highest mountains in Wales are in Snowdonia and include Snowdon (Welsh: Yr
Wyddfa) which, at 1,085 metres (3,560 ft), is the highest peak in Wales. The 14,
or possibly 15, Welsh mountains over 3,000 feet (910 metres) high are known
collectively as the Welsh 3000s. Wales has over 2,704 kilometres (1,680 miles)
of coastline. Several islands lie off the Welsh mainland, the largest of which
is Anglesey (Ynys Môn) in the north-west.

Northern Ireland, separated from Great Britain by the Irish Sea and North
Channel, has an area of 14,160 square kilometres (5,470 sq mi) and is mostly
hilly. It includes Lough Neagh which, at 388 square kilometres (150 sq mi), is
the largest lake in the British Isles by area. The highest peak in Northern
Ireland is Slieve Donard in the Mourne Mountains at 852 metres (2,795 ft).

The United Kingdom has a temperate climate, with plentiful rainfall all year
round. The temperature varies with the seasons seldom dropping below −11 °C
(12 °F) or rising above 35 °C (95 °F). The prevailing wind is from the
south-west and bears frequent spells of mild and wet weather from the Atlantic
Ocean, although the eastern parts are mostly sheltered from this wind since the
majority of the rain falls over the western regions the eastern parts are
therefore the driest. Atlantic currents, warmed by the Gulf Stream, bring mild
winters; especially in the west where winters are wet and even more so over high
ground. Summers are warmest in the south-east of England, being closest to the
European mainland, and coolest in the north. Heavy snowfall can occur in winter
and early spring on high ground, and occasionally settles to great depth away
from the hills.

There is no consistent system of administrative or geographic demarcation across
the United Kingdom. Each country of the United Kingdom has its own arrangements,
whose origins often pre-date the UK's formation. Until the 19th century there
was little change to those arrangements, but there has since been a constant
evolution of role and function, most significantly the devolution of powers to
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.

The organisation of local government in England is complex, with the
distribution of functions varying according to local arrangements. Legislation
concerning local government in England is the responsibility of the UK's
parliament and the government, as England has no devolved legislature. The
upper-tier subdivisions of England are the nine regions, now used primarily for
statistical purposes. One region, Greater London, has had a directly elected
assembly and mayor since 2000 following popular support for the proposal in a
referendum. It was intended that other regions would also be given their own
elected regional assemblies, but a proposed assembly in the North East region
was rejected by a referendum in 2004. Below the regional tier, some parts of
England have county councils and district councils and others have unitary
authorities; while London consists of 32 London boroughs and the City of London.
Councillors are elected by the first-past-the-post system in single-member wards
or by the multi-member plurality system in multi-member wards.

For local government purposes, Scotland is divided into 32 council areas, with
wide variation in both size and population. The cities of Glasgow, Edinburgh,
Aberdeen and Dundee are separate council areas, as is the Highland Council which
includes a third of Scotland's area but only just over 200,000 people. Local
councils are made up of elected councillors, of whom there are 1,223; they are
paid a part-time salary. Elections are conducted by single transferable vote in
multi-member wards that elect either three or four councillors. Each council
elects a Provost, or Convenor, to chair meetings of the council and to act as a
figurehead for the area. Councillors are subject to a code of conduct enforced
by the Standards Commission for Scotland. The representative association of
Scotland's local authorities is the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities
(COSLA).

Local government in Wales consists of 22 unitary authorities. These include the
cities of Cardiff, Swansea and Newport which are unitary authorities in their
own right. Elections are held every four years under the first-past-the-post
system. The most recent elections were held in May 2012, except for the Isle of
Anglesey. The Welsh Local Government Association represents the interests of
local authorities in Wales.

Local government in Northern Ireland has since 1973 been organised into 26
district councils, each elected by single transferable vote. Their powers are
limited to services such as collecting waste, controlling dogs and maintaining
parks and cemeteries. On 13 March 2008 the executive agreed on proposals to
create 11 new councils and replace the present system. The next local elections
were postponed until 2016 to facilitate this.

The United Kingdom has sovereignty over seventeen territories which do not form
part of the United Kingdom itself: fourteen British Overseas Territories and
three Crown dependencies.

The fourteen British Overseas Territories are: Anguilla; Bermuda; the British
Antarctic Territory; the British Indian Ocean Territory; the British Virgin
Islands; the Cayman Islands; the Falkland Islands; Gibraltar; Montserrat; Saint
Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha; the Turks and Caicos Islands; the
Pitcairn Islands; South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands; and Sovereign
Base Areas on Cyprus. British claims in Antarctica are not universally
recognised. Collectively Britain's overseas territories encompass an approximate
land area of 1,727,570 square kilometres (667,018 sq mi) and a population of
approximately 260,000 people. They are the remnants of the British Empire and
several have specifically voted to remain British territories (Bermuda in 1995,
Gibraltar in 2002 and the Falkland Islands in 2013).

The Crown dependencies are possessions of the Crown, as opposed to overseas
territories of the UK. They comprise three independently administered
jurisdictions: the Channel Islands of Jersey and Guernsey in the English
Channel, and the Isle of Man in the Irish Sea. By mutual agreement, the British
Government manages the islands' foreign affairs and defence and the UK
Parliament has the authority to legislate on their behalf. However,
internationally, they are regarded as "territories for which the United Kingdom
is responsible". The power to pass legislation affecting the islands ultimately
rests with their own respective legislative assemblies, with the assent of the
Crown (Privy Council or, in the case of the Isle of Man, in certain
circumstances the Lieutenant-Governor). Since 2005 each Crown dependency has had
a Chief Minister as its head of government.

The British dependencies use a varied assortment of currencies. These include
the British pound, US dollar, New Zealand dollar, euro or their own currencies,
which may be pegged to either.

The United Kingdom is a unitary state under a constitutional monarchy. Queen
Elizabeth II is the head of state of the UK as well as monarch of fifteen other
independent Commonwealth countries. The monarch has "the right to be consulted,
the right to encourage, and the right to warn". The Constitution of the United
Kingdom is uncodified and consists mostly of a collection of disparate written
sources, including statutes, judge-made case law and international treaties,
together with constitutional conventions. As there is no technical difference
between ordinary statutes and "constitutional law", the UK Parliament can
perform "constitutional reform" simply by passing Acts of Parliament, and thus
has the political power to change or abolish almost any written or unwritten
element of the constitution. However, no Parliament can pass laws that future
Parliaments cannot change.

The UK has a parliamentary government based on the Westminster system that has
been emulated around the world: a legacy of the British Empire. The parliament
of the United Kingdom meets in the Palace of Westminster and has two houses: an
elected House of Commons and an appointed House of Lords. All bills passed are
given Royal Assent before becoming law.

The position of prime minister,[note 13] the UK's head of government, belongs to
the person most likely to command the confidence of the House of Commons; this
individual is typically the leader of the political party or coalition of
parties that holds the largest number of seats in that chamber. The prime
minister chooses a cabinet and its members are formally appointed by the monarch
to form Her Majesty's Government. By convention, the monarch respects the prime
minister's decisions of government.

The cabinet is traditionally drawn from members of the prime minister's party or
coalition and mostly from the House of Commons but always from both legislative
houses, the cabinet being responsible to both. Executive power is exercised by
the prime minister and cabinet, all of whom are sworn into the Privy Council of
the United Kingdom, and become Ministers of the Crown. The current Prime
Minister is Theresa May, who has been in office since 13 July 2016. May is also
the leader of the Conservative Party. For elections to the House of Commons, the
UK is divided into 650 constituencies, each electing a single member of
parliament (MP) by simple plurality. General elections are called by the monarch
when the prime minister so advises. Prior to the Fixed-term Parliaments Act
2011, the Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949 required that a new election must be
called no later than five years after the previous general election.

The Conservative Party, the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats (formerly as
the Liberal Party) have, in modern times, been considered the UK's three major
political parties, representing the British traditions of conservatism,
socialism and social liberalism, respectively. However, at the 2015 general
election, the Scottish National Party became the third-largest party by number
of seats won, ahead of the Liberal Democrats. Most of the remaining seats were
won by parties that contest elections only in one part of the UK: Plaid Cymru
(Wales only); and the Democratic Unionist Party, Ulster Unionist Party, Social
Democratic and Labour Party and Sinn Féin (Northern Ireland only[note 14]). In
accordance with party policy, no elected Sinn Féin members of parliament have
ever attended the House of Commons to speak on behalf of their constituents
because of the requirement to take an oath of allegiance to the monarch.

Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland each have their own government or
executive, led by a First Minister (or, in the case of Northern Ireland, a
diarchal First Minister and deputy First Minister), and a devolved unicameral
legislature. England, the largest country of the United Kingdom, has no such
devolved executive or legislature and is administered and legislated for
directly by the UK's government and parliament on all issues. This situation has
given rise to the so-called West Lothian question which concerns the fact that
members of parliament from Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland can vote,
sometimes decisively, on matters that only affect England. The McKay Commission
reported on this matter in March 2013 recommending that laws affecting only
England should need support from a majority of English members of parliament.

The Scottish Government and Parliament have wide-ranging powers over any matter
that has not been specifically reserved to the UK Parliament, including
education, healthcare, Scots law and local government. At the 2011 elections the
Scottish National Party won re-election and achieved an overall majority in the
Scottish Parliament, with its leader, Alex Salmond, as First Minister of
Scotland. In 2012, the UK and Scottish governments signed the Edinburgh
Agreement setting out the terms for a referendum on Scottish independence in
2014, which was defeated 55% to 45%.

The Welsh Government and the National Assembly for Wales have more limited
powers than those devolved to Scotland. The Assembly is able to legislate on
devolved matters through Acts of the Assembly, which require no prior consent
from Westminster. The 2011 elections resulted in a minority Labour
administration led by Carwyn Jones.

The Northern Ireland Executive and Assembly have powers similar to those
devolved to Scotland. The Executive is led by a diarchy representing unionist
and nationalist members of the Assembly. Arlene Foster (Democratic Unionist
Party) and Martin McGuinness (Sinn Féin) were First Minister and deputy First
Minister respectively until 2017. Devolution to Northern Ireland is contingent
on participation by the Northern Ireland administration in the North-South
Ministerial Council, where the Northern Ireland Executive cooperates and
develops joint and shared policies with the Government of Ireland. The British
and Irish governments co-operate on non-devolved matters affecting Northern
Ireland through the British–Irish Intergovernmental Conference, which assumes
the responsibilities of the Northern Ireland administration in the event of its
non-operation.

The UK does not have a codified constitution and constitutional matters are not
among the powers devolved to Scotland, Wales or Northern Ireland. Under the
doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty, the UK Parliament could, in theory,
therefore, abolish the Scottish Parliament, Welsh Assembly or Northern Ireland
Assembly. Indeed, in 1972, the UK Parliament unilaterally prorogued the
Parliament of Northern Ireland, setting a precedent relevant to contemporary
devolved institutions. In practice, it would be politically difficult for the UK
Parliament to abolish devolution to the Scottish Parliament and the Welsh
Assembly, given the political entrenchment created by referendum decisions. The
political constraints placed upon the UK Parliament's power to interfere with
devolution in Northern Ireland are even greater than in relation to Scotland and
Wales, given that devolution in Northern Ireland rests upon an international
agreement with the Government of Ireland.

The United Kingdom does not have a single legal system, as Article 19 of the
1706 Treaty of Union provided for the continuation of Scotland's separate legal
system. Today the UK has three distinct systems of law: English law, Northern
Ireland law and Scots law. A new Supreme Court of the United Kingdom came into
being in October 2009 to replace the Appellate Committee of the House of Lords.
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, including the same members as the
Supreme Court, is the highest court of appeal for several independent
Commonwealth countries, the British Overseas Territories and the Crown
Dependencies.

Both English law, which applies in England and Wales, and Northern Ireland law
are based on common-law principles. The essence of common law is that, subject
to statute, the law is developed by judges in courts, applying statute,
precedent and common sense to the facts before them to give explanatory
judgements of the relevant legal principles, which are reported and binding in
future similar cases (stare decisis). The courts of England and Wales are headed
by the Senior Courts of England and Wales, consisting of the Court of Appeal,
the High Court of Justice (for civil cases) and the Crown Court (for criminal
cases). The Supreme Court is the highest court in the land for both criminal and
civil appeal cases in England, Wales and Northern Ireland and any decision it
makes is binding on every other court in the same jurisdiction, often having a
persuasive effect in other jurisdictions.

Scots law is a hybrid system based on both common-law and civil-law principles.
The chief courts are the Court of Session, for civil cases, and the High Court
of Justiciary, for criminal cases. The Supreme Court of the United Kingdom
serves as the highest court of appeal for civil cases under Scots law. Sheriff
courts deal with most civil and criminal cases including conducting criminal
trials with a jury, known as sheriff solemn court, or with a sheriff and no
jury, known as sheriff summary Court. The Scots legal system is unique in having
three possible verdicts for a criminal trial: "guilty", "not guilty" and "not
proven". Both "not guilty" and "not proven" result in an acquittal.

Crime in England and Wales increased in the period between 1981 and 1995, though
since that peak there has been an overall fall of 66% in recorded crime from
1995 to 2015, according to crime statistics. The prison population of England
and Wales has increased to 86,000, giving England and Wales the highest rate of
incarceration in Western Europe at 148 per 100,000. Her Majesty's Prison
Service, which reports to the Ministry of Justice, manages most of the prisons
within England and Wales. The murder rate in England and Wales has stabilised in
the first half of the 2010s with a murder rate around 1 per 100,000 which is
half the peak in 2002 and similar to the rate in the 1980s.[unreliable source]
More sexual offences have been reported to the police since 2002. Crime in
Scotland fell slightly in 2014/2015 to its lowest level in 39 years in with 59
killings for a murder rate of 1.1 per 100,000. Scotland's prisons are
overcrowded but the prison population is shrinking.

The UK is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, a member of
NATO, the Commonwealth of Nations, the G7 finance ministers, the G7 forum
(previously the G8 forum), the G20, the OECD, the WTO, the Council of Europe,
the OSCE, and is a member state of the European Union. The UK is said to have a
"Special Relationship" with the United States and a close partnership with
France—the "Entente cordiale"—and shares nuclear weapons technology with both
countries. The UK is also closely linked with the Republic of Ireland; the two
countries share a Common Travel Area and co-operate through the British-Irish
Intergovernmental Conference and the British-Irish Council. Britain's global
presence and influence is further amplified through its trading relations,
foreign investments, official development assistance and military engagements.

The armed forces of the United Kingdom—officially, Her Majesty's Armed
Forces—consist of three professional service branches: the Royal Navy and Royal
Marines (forming the Naval Service), the British Army and the Royal Air Force.
The forces are managed by the Ministry of Defence and controlled by the Defence
Council, chaired by the Secretary of State for Defence. The Commander-in-Chief
is the British monarch, Elizabeth II, to whom members of the forces swear an
oath of allegiance. The Armed Forces are charged with protecting the UK and its
overseas territories, promoting the UK's global security interests and
supporting international peacekeeping efforts. They are active and regular
participants in NATO, including the Allied Rapid Reaction Corps, as well as the
Five Power Defence Arrangements, RIMPAC and other worldwide coalition
operations. Overseas garrisons and facilities are maintained in Ascension
Island, Belize, Brunei, Canada, Cyprus, Diego Garcia, the Falkland Islands,
Germany, Gibraltar, Kenya, Qatar and Singapore.

The British armed forces played a key role in establishing the British Empire as
the dominant world power in the 18th, 19th and early 20th centuries. Throughout
its unique history the British forces have seen action in a number of major
wars, such as the Seven Years' War, the Napoleonic Wars, the Crimean War, the
First World War and the Second World War—as well as many colonial conflicts. By
emerging victorious from such conflicts, Britain has often been able to
decisively influence world events. Since the end of the British Empire, the UK
has nonetheless remained a major military power. Following the end of the Cold
War, defence policy has a stated assumption that "the most demanding operations"
will be undertaken as part of a coalition. Setting aside the intervention in
Sierra Leone, recent UK military operations in Bosnia, Kosovo, Afghanistan, Iraq
and, most recently, Libya, have followed this approach. The last occasion on
which the British military fought alone was the Falklands War of 1982.

According to various sources, including the Stockholm International Peace
Research Institute and the International Institute for Strategic Studies, the
United Kingdom has the fourth- or fifth-highest military expenditure in the
world. Total defence spending amounts to 2.0% of national GDP.

The UK has a partially regulated market economy. Based on market exchange rates,
the UK is today the fifth-largest economy in the world and the second-largest in
Europe after Germany. HM Treasury, led by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, is
responsible for developing and executing the government's public finance policy
and economic policy. The Bank of England is the UK's central bank and is
responsible for issuing notes and coins in the nation's currency, the pound
sterling. Banks in Scotland and Northern Ireland retain the right to issue their
own notes, subject to retaining enough Bank of England notes in reserve to cover
their issue. The pound sterling is the world's third-largest reserve currency
(after the US dollar and the euro). Since 1997 the Bank of England's Monetary
Policy Committee, headed by the Governor of the Bank of England, has been
responsible for setting interest rates at the level necessary to achieve the
overall inflation target for the economy that is set by the Chancellor each
year.

The UK service sector makes up around 73% of GDP. London is one of the three
"command centres" of the global economy (alongside New York City and Tokyo), it
is the world's largest financial centre alongside New York, and it has the
largest city GDP in Europe. Edinburgh is also one of the largest financial
centres in Europe. Tourism is very important to the British economy; with over
27 million tourists arriving in 2004, the United Kingdom is ranked as the sixth
major tourist destination in the world and London has the most international
visitors of any city in the world. The creative industries accounted for 7% GVA
in 2005 and grew at an average of 6% per annum between 1997 and 2005.

The Industrial Revolution started in the UK with an initial concentration on the
textile industry, followed by other heavy industries such as shipbuilding, coal
mining and steelmaking. British merchants, shippers and bankers developed
overwhelming advantage over those of other nations allowing the UK to dominate
international trade in the 19th century. As other nations industrialised,
coupled with economic decline after two world wars, the United Kingdom began to
lose its competitive advantage and heavy industry declined, by degrees,
throughout the 20th century. Manufacturing remains a significant part of the
economy but accounted for only 16.7% of national output in 2003.

The automotive industry is a significant part of the UK manufacturing sector and
employs around 800,000 people, with a turnover in 2015 of some £70 billion,
generating £34.6 billion of exports (11.8% of the UK's total export goods). In
2015, the UK produced around 1.6 million passenger vehicles and 94,500
commercial vehicles. The UK is a major centre for engine manufacturing and in
2015 around 2.4 million engines were produced in the country. The UK has a
significant presence in motor racing and the UK motorsport industry employs
around 41,000 people, comprises around 4,500 companies and has an annual
turnover of around £6 billion.

The aerospace industry of the UK is the second- or third-largest national
aerospace industry in the world depending upon the method of measurement and has
an annual turnover of around £30 billion. In 2016, the global market opportunity
for UK aerospace manufacturers over the next two decades was estimated to be
£3.5 trillion. The wings for the Airbus A380 and the A350 XWB are designed and
manufactured at Airbus UK's world-leading Broughton facility, whilst over a
quarter of the value of the Boeing 787 comes from UK manufacturers including
Eaton (fuel subsystem pumps), Messier-Bugatti-Dowty (the landing gear) and
Rolls-Royce (the engines). Other key names include GKN Aerospace—an expert in
metallic and composite aerostructures that's involved in almost every civil and
military fixed and rotary wing aircraft in production and development today.

BAE Systems plays a critical role in some of the world's biggest defence
aerospace projects. The company makes large sections of the Typhoon Eurofighter
at its sub-assembly plant in Samlesbury and assembles the aircraft for the Royal
Air Force at its Warton Plant, near Preston. It is also a principal
subcontractor on the F35 Joint Strike Fighter—the world's largest single defence
project—for which it designs and manufactures a range of components including
the aft fuselage, vertical and horizontal tail and wing tips and fuel system. As
well as this it manufactures the Hawk, the world's most successful jet training
aircraft. Airbus UK also manufactures the wings for the A400 m military
transporter. Rolls-Royce, is the world's second-largest aero-engine
manufacturer. Its engines power more than 30 types of commercial aircraft and it
has more than 30,000 engines in service in the civil and defence sectors.
Rolls-Royce is forecast to have more than 50% of the widebody market share by
2016, ahead of General Electric. Agusta Westland designs and manufactures
complete helicopters in the UK.

The UK space industry was worth £9.1bn in 2011 and employed 29,000 people. It is
growing at a rate of 7.5% annually, according to its umbrella organisation, the
UK Space Agency. Government strategy is for the space industry to be a £40bn
business for the UK by 2030, capturing a 10% share of the $250bn world market
for commercial space technology. On 16 July 2013, the British Government pledged
£60 m to the Skylon project: this investment will provide support at a "crucial
stage" to allow a full-scale prototype of the SABRE engine to be built. On 2
November 2015, BAE Systems announced they have bought a 20% stake in Reaction
Engines ltd. The working partnership will draw on BAE Systems' extensive
aerospace technology development and project management expertise and will
provide Reaction Engines with access to critical industrial, technical and
capital resources to help progress the development of the SABRE engine.

The pharmaceutical industry plays an important role in the UK economy and the
country has the third-highest share of global pharmaceutical R&D expenditures
(after the United States and Japan).

Agriculture is intensive, highly mechanised and efficient by European standards,
producing about 60% of food needs with less than 1.6% of the labour force
(535,000 workers). Around two-thirds of production is devoted to livestock,
one-third to arable crops. Farmers are subsidised by the EU's Common
Agricultural Policy. The UK retains a significant, though much reduced fishing
industry. It is also rich in a number of natural resources including coal,
petroleum, natural gas, tin, limestone, iron ore, salt, clay, chalk, gypsum,
lead, silica and an abundance of arable land.[citation needed]

In the final quarter of 2008, as a result of the Great Recession, the UK economy
officially entered recession for the first time since 1991. Unemployment
increased from 5.2% in May 2008 to 7.6% in May 2009 and by January 2012 the
unemployment rate among 18- to 24-year-olds had risen from 11.9% to 22.5%, the
highest since current records began in 1992, although it had fallen to 14.2% by
November 2015. Total UK government debt rose quickly from 44.4% of GDP in 2007
to 82.9% of GDP in 2011, then increased more slowly to 87.5% of GDP in 2015.
Following the likes of the United States, France and many major economies, in
February 2013, the UK lost its top AAA credit rating for the first time since
1978 with Moodys and Fitch credit agency while, unlike the other major economies
retained their triple A rating with the largest agency Standard & Poor's.
However, by the end of 2014, UK growth was the fastest in both the G7 and in
Europe, and by September 2015, the unemployment rate was down to a seven-year
low of 5.3%.

As a direct result of the Great Recession between 2010 and the third quarter of
2012 wages in the UK fell by 3.2%, but by 2015 real wages were growing by 3%,
having grown faster than inflation since 2014. Since the 1980s, UK economic
inequality, like Canada, Australia and the United States has grown faster than
in other developed countries.

The poverty line in the UK is commonly defined as being 60% of the median
household income.[note 15] In 2007–2008 13.5 million people, or 22% of the
population, lived below this line. This is a higher level of relative poverty
than all but four other EU members. In the same year 4.0 million children, 31%
of the total, lived in households below the poverty line after housing costs
were taken into account. This is a decrease of 400,000 children since 1998–1999.
The UK imports 40% of its food supplies. The Office for National Statistics has
estimated that in 2011, 14 million people were at risk of poverty or social
exclusion, and that one person in 20 (5.1%) was now experiencing "severe
material depression", up from 3 million people in 1977.

The UK has an external debt of $9.6 trillion dollars which is second highest in
the world after the US which has an external debt of 18.5 trillion dollars. As a
percentage of GDP, external debt is 408% which is third highest in the world
after Luxembourg and Iceland.

The combination of the UK's relatively lax regulatory regime and London's
financial institutions providing sophisticated methods to launder proceeds from
criminal activity around the world, including those from drug trade, makes the
City of London a global hub for illicit finance and the UK a safe haven for the
world's major-league tax dodgers, according to research papers and reports
published in the mid-2010s. The reports on the Panama papers published in April
2016 singled out the UK as being "at the heart of super-rich tax-avoidance
network."

England and Scotland were leading centres of the Scientific Revolution from the
17th century and the United Kingdom led the Industrial Revolution from the 18th
century, and has continued to produce scientists and engineers credited with
important advances. Major theorists from the 17th and 18th centuries include
Isaac Newton, whose laws of motion and illumination of gravity have been seen as
a keystone of modern science; from the 19th century Charles Darwin, whose theory
of evolution by natural selection was fundamental to the development of modern
biology, and James Clerk Maxwell, who formulated classical electromagnetic
theory; and more recently Stephen Hawking, who has advanced major theories in
the fields of cosmology, quantum gravity and the investigation of black holes.

Major scientific discoveries from the 18th century include hydrogen by Henry
Cavendish; from the 20th century penicillin by Alexander Fleming, and the
structure of DNA, by Francis Crick and others. Famous British engineers and
inventors of the Industrial Revolution include James Watt, George Stephenson,
Richard Arkwright, Robert Stephenson and Isambard Kingdom Brunel. Other major
engineering projects and applications by people from the UK include the steam
locomotive, developed by Richard Trevithick and Andrew Vivian; from the 19th
century the electric motor by Michael Faraday, the incandescent light bulb by
Joseph Swan, and the first practical telephone, patented by Alexander Graham
Bell; and in the 20th century the world's first working television system by
John Logie Baird and others, the jet engine by Frank Whittle, the basis of the
modern computer by Alan Turing, and the World Wide Web by Tim Berners-Lee.

Scientific research and development remains important in British universities,
with many establishing science parks to facilitate production and co-operation
with industry. Between 2004 and 2008 the UK produced 7% of the world's
scientific research papers and had an 8% share of scientific citations, the
third and second highest in the world (after the United States and China,
respectively). Scientific journals produced in the UK include Nature, the
British Medical Journal and The Lancet.

A radial road network totals 29,145 miles (46,904 km) of main roads, 2,173 miles
(3,497 km) of motorways and 213,750 miles (344,000 km) of paved roads. The M25,
encircling London, is the largest and busiest bypass in the world. In 2009 there
were a total of 34 million licensed vehicles in Great Britain.

The UK has a railway network of 10,072 miles (16,209 km) in Great Britain and
189 miles (304 km) in Northern Ireland. Railways in Northern Ireland are
operated by NI Railways, a subsidiary of state-owned Translink. In Great
Britain, the British Rail network was privatised between 1994 and 1997, which
was followed by a rapid rise in passenger numbers following years of decline,
although the factors behind this are disputed. Network Rail owns and manages
most of the fixed assets (tracks, signals etc.). About 20 privately owned Train
Operating Companies operate passenger trains, which carried 1.68 billion
passengers in 2015. There are also some 1,000 freight trains in daily
operation.[when?] The British Government is to spend £30 billion on a new
high-speed railway line, HS2, to be operational by 2026. Crossrail, under
construction in London, is Europe's largest construction project with a £15
billion projected cost.

In the year from October 2009 to September 2010 UK airports handled a total of
211.4 million passengers. In that period the three largest airports were London
Heathrow Airport (65.6 million passengers), Gatwick Airport (31.5 million
passengers) and London Stansted Airport (18.9 million passengers). London
Heathrow Airport, located 15 miles (24 km) west of the capital, has the most
international passenger traffic of any airport in the world and is the hub for
the UK flag carrier British Airways, as well as Virgin Atlantic.

In 2006, the UK was the world's ninth-largest consumer of energy and the
15th-largest producer. The UK is home to a number of large energy companies,
including two of the six oil and gas "supermajors"—BP and Royal Dutch Shell—and
BG Group. In 2011, 40% of the UK's electricity was produced by gas, 30% by coal,
19% by nuclear power and 4.2% by wind, hydro, biofuels and wastes.

In 2013, the UK produced 914 thousand barrels per day (bbl/d) of oil and
consumed 1,507 thousand bbl/d. Production is now in decline and the UK has been
a net importer of oil since 2005. In 2010[update] the UK had around 3.1 billion
barrels of proven crude oil reserves, the largest of any EU member state. In
2009, 66.5% of the UK's oil supply was imported.

In 2009, the UK was the 13th-largest producer of natural gas in the world and
the largest producer in the EU. Production is now in decline and the UK has been
a net importer of natural gas since 2004. In 2009, half of British gas was
supplied from imports as domestic reserves are depleted.

Coal production played a key role in the UK economy in the 19th and 20th
centuries. In the mid-1970s, 130 million tonnes of coal was being produced
annually, not falling below 100 million tonnes until the early 1980s. During the
1980s and 1990s the industry was scaled back considerably. In 2011, the UK
produced 18.3 million tonnes of coal. In 2005 it had proven recoverable coal
reserves of 171 million tons. The UK Coal Authority has stated there is a
potential to produce between 7 billion tonnes and 16 billion tonnes of coal
through underground coal gasification (UCG) or 'fracking', and that, based on
current UK coal consumption, such reserves could last between 200 and 400 years.
However, environmental and social concerns have been raised over chemicals
getting into the water table and minor earthquakes damaging homes.

In the late 1990s, nuclear power plants contributed around 25% of total annual
electricity generation in the UK, but this has gradually declined as old plants
have been shut down and ageing-related problems affect plant availability. In
2012, the UK had 16 reactors normally generating about 19% of its electricity.
All but one of the reactors will be retired by 2023. Unlike Germany and Japan,
the UK intends to build a new generation of nuclear plants from about 2018.

The total of all renewable electricity sources provided for 14.9% of the
electricity generated in the United Kingdom in 2013, reaching 53.7 TWh of
electricity generated. The UK is one of the best sites in Europe for wind
energy, and wind power production is its fastest growing supply, in 2014 it
generated 9.3% of the UK's total electricity.

Access to improved water supply and sanitation in the UK is universal. It is
estimated that 96.7% of households are connected to the sewer network. According
to the Environment Agency, total water abstraction for public water supply in
the UK was 16,406 megalitres per day in 2007. In England and Wales the economic
regulator of water companies is the Water Services Regulation Authority (Ofwat).
The Environment Agency is responsible for environmental regulation, and the
Drinking Water Inspectorate for regulating drinking water quality. The economic
water industry regulator in Scotland is the Water Industry Commission for
Scotland and the environmental regulator is the Scottish Environment Protection
Agency. Drinking water standards and wastewater discharge standards in the UK,
as in other countries of the European Union, are determined by the EU (see Water
supply and sanitation in the European Union).

In England and Wales water and sewerage services are provided by 10 private
regional water and sewerage companies and 13 mostly smaller private "water only"
companies. In Scotland water and sewerage services are provided by a single
public company, Scottish Water. In Northern Ireland water and sewerage services
are also provided by a single public entity, Northern Ireland Water.

A census is taken simultaneously in all parts of the UK every ten years. The
Office for National Statistics is responsible for collecting data for England
and Wales, the General Register Office for Scotland and the Northern Ireland
Statistics and Research Agency each being responsible for censuses in their
respective countries. In the 2011 census the total population of the United
Kingdom was 63,181,775. It is the third-largest in the European Union, the
fifth-largest in the Commonwealth and the 22nd-largest in the world. In mid-2014
and mid-2015 net long-term international migration contributed more to
population growth. In mid-2012 and mid-2013 natural change contributed the most
to population growth. Between 2001 and 2011 the population increased by an
average annual rate of approximately 0.7%. This compares to 0.3% per year in the
period 1991 to 2001 and 0.2% in the decade 1981 to 1991. The 2011 census also
confirmed that the proportion of the population aged 0–14 has nearly halved (31%
in 1911 compared to 18 in 2011) and the proportion of older people aged 65 and
over has more than tripled (from 5 to 16%). It has been estimated that the
number of people aged 100 or over will rise steeply to reach over 626,000 by
2080.

England's population in 2011 was found to be 53 million. It is one of the most
densely populated countries in the world, with 420 people resident per square
kilometre in mid-2015. with a particular concentration in London and the
south-east. The 2011 census put Scotland's population at 5.3 million, Wales at
3.06 million and Northern Ireland at 1.81 million. In percentage terms England
has had the fastest growing population of any country of the UK in the period
from 2001 to 2011, with an increase of 7.9%.

In 2012 the average total fertility rate (TFR) across the UK was 1.92 children
per woman. While a rising birth rate is contributing to current population
growth, it remains considerably below the 'baby boom' peak of 2.95 children per
woman in 1964, below the replacement rate of 2.1, but higher than the 2001
record low of 1.63. In 2012, Scotland had the lowest TFR at only 1.67, followed
by Wales at 1.88, England at 1.94, and Northern Ireland at 2.03. In 2011, 47.3%
of births in the UK were to unmarried women. The Office for National Statistics
published an "Experimental Official Statistics" bulletin in 2015 showing that,
out of the UK population aged 16 and over, 1.7% identify as lesbian, gay, or
bisexual (2.0% of males and 1.5% of females). 4.5% of respondents responded with
"other", "I don't know", or did not respond.

Historically, indigenous British people were thought to be descended from the
various ethnic groups that settled there before the 11th century: the Celts,
Romans, Anglo-Saxons, Norse and the Normans. Welsh people could be the oldest
ethnic group in the UK. A 2006 genetic study shows that more than 50% of
England's gene pool contains Germanic Y chromosomes. Another 2005 genetic
analysis indicates that "about 75% of the traceable ancestors of the modern
British population had arrived in the British isles by about 6,200 years ago, at
the start of the British Neolithic or Stone Age", and that the British broadly
share a common ancestry with the Basque people.

The UK has a history of small-scale non-white immigration, with Liverpool having
the oldest Black population in the country dating back to at least the 1730s
during the period of the African slave trade, and the oldest Chinese community
in Europe, dating to the arrival of Chinese seamen in the 19th century. In 1950
there were probably fewer than 20,000 non-white residents in Britain, almost all
born overseas.

Since 1948 substantial immigration from Africa, the Caribbean and South Asia has
been a legacy of ties forged by the British Empire. Migration from new EU member
states in Central and Eastern Europe since 2004 has resulted in growth in these
population groups, although some of this migration has been temporary. Since the
1990s, there has been substantial diversification of the immigrant population,
with migrants to the UK coming from a much wider range of countries than
previous waves, which tended to involve larger numbers of migrants coming from a
relatively small number of countries.

Academics have argued that the ethnicity categories employed in British national
statistics, which were first introduced in the 1991 census, involve confusion
between the concepts of ethnicity and race. In 2011[update], 87.2% of the UK
population identified themselves as white, meaning 12.8% of the UK population
identify themselves as of one of number of ethnic minority groups. In the 2001
census, this figure was 7.9% of the UK population.

Because of differences in the wording of the census forms used in England and
Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, data on the Other White group is not
available for the UK as a whole, but in England and Wales this was the fastest
growing group between the 2001 and 2011 censuses, increasing by 1.1 million (1.8
percentage points). Amongst groups for which comparable data is available for
all parts of the UK level, there was considerable growth in the size of the
Other Asian category, which increased from 0.4 to 1.4% of the population between
2001 and 2011. There was also considerable growth in the Mixed category. In
2001, people in this category accounted for 1.2% of the UK population; by 2011,
the proportion was 2%.

Ethnic diversity varies significantly across the UK. 30.4% of London's
population and 37.4% of Leicester's was estimated to be non-white in
2005[update], whereas less than 5% of the populations of North East England,
Wales and the South West were from ethnic minorities, according to the 2001
census. In 2016[update], 31.4% of primary and 27.9% of secondary pupils at state
schools in England were members of an ethnic minority.

The UK's de facto official language is English. It is estimated that 95% of the
UK's population are monolingual English speakers. 5.5% of the population are
estimated to speak languages brought to the UK as a result of relatively recent
immigration. South Asian languages, including Punjabi, Urdu, Hindi, Bengali,
Tamil and Gujarati, are the largest grouping and are spoken by 2.7% of the UK
population. According to the 2011 census, Polish has become the second-largest
language spoken in England and has 546,000 speakers.

Four Celtic languages are spoken in the UK: Welsh, Irish, Scottish Gaelic and
Cornish. All are recognised as regional or minority languages, subject to
specific measures of protection and promotion under the European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages and the Framework Convention for the Protection
of National Minorities. In the 2001 Census over a fifth (21%) of the population
of Wales said they could speak Welsh, an increase from the 1991 Census (18%). In
addition it is estimated that about 200,000 Welsh speakers live in England. In
the same census in Northern Ireland 167,487 people (10.4%) stated that they had
"some knowledge of Irish" (see Irish language in Northern Ireland), almost
exclusively in the nationalist (mainly Catholic) population. Over 92,000 people
in Scotland (just under 2% of the population) had some Gaelic language ability,
including 72% of those living in the Outer Hebrides. The number of
schoolchildren being taught through Welsh, Scottish Gaelic and Irish is
increasing. Among emigrant-descended populations some Scottish Gaelic is still
spoken in Canada (principally Nova Scotia and Cape Breton Island), and Welsh in
Patagonia, Argentina.

Scots, a language descended from early northern Middle English, has limited
recognition alongside its regional variant, Ulster Scots in Northern Ireland,
without specific commitments to protection and promotion.

It is compulsory for pupils to study a second language up to the age of 14 in
England, and up to age 16 in Scotland. French and German are the two most
commonly taught second languages in England and Scotland. All pupils in Wales
are taught Welsh as a second language up to age 16, or are taught in Welsh.

Forms of Christianity have dominated religious life in what is now the United
Kingdom for over 1400 years. Although a majority of citizens still identify with
Christianity in many surveys, regular church attendance has fallen dramatically
since the middle of the 20th century, while immigration and demographic change
have contributed to the growth of other faiths, most notably Islam. This has led
some commentators to variously describe the UK as a multi-faith, secularised, or
post-Christian society.

In the 2001 census 71.6% of all respondents indicated that they were Christians,
with the next largest faiths being Islam (2.8%), Hinduism (1.0%), Sikhism
(0.6%), Judaism (0.5%), Buddhism (0.3%) and all other religions (0.3%). 15% of
respondents stated that they had no religion, with a further 7% not stating a
religious preference. A Tearfund survey in 2007 showed only one in ten Britons
actually attend church weekly. Between the 2001 and 2011 census there was a
decrease in the amount of people who identified as Christian by 12%, whilst the
percentage of those reporting no religious affiliation doubled. This contrasted
with growth in the other main religious group categories, with the number of
Muslims increasing by the most substantial margin to a total of about 5%. The
Muslim population has increased from 1.6 million in 2001 to 2.7 million in 2011,
making it the second-largest religious group in the United Kingdom.

In a 2015 survey conducted by BSA (British Social Attitudes) on religious
affiliation; 49% of respondents indicated 'no religion', while 42% indicated
they were Christians, followed by 8% who affiliated with other religions (e.g.
Islam, Hinduism, Judaism, etc.). Among Christians, adherents to the Church of
England constituted 17%, Roman Catholic Church - 8%, other Christians (including
Presbyterians, Methodists, other Protestants, as well as Eastern Orthodox) -
17%. Amid other religions, Islam accounted for 5%.

The Church of England is the established church in England. It retains a
representation in the UK Parliament and the British monarch is its Supreme
Governor. In Scotland, the Church of Scotland is recognised as the national
church. It is not subject to state control, and the British monarch is an
ordinary member, required to swear an oath to "maintain and preserve the
Protestant Religion and Presbyterian Church Government" upon his or her
accession. The Church in Wales was disestablished in 1920 and, as the Church of
Ireland was disestablished in 1870 before the partition of Ireland, there is no
established church in Northern Ireland. Although there are no UK-wide data in
the 2001 census on adherence to individual Christian denominations, it has been
estimated that 62% of Christians are Anglican, 13.5% Catholic, 6% Presbyterian,
3.4% Methodist with small numbers of other Protestant denominations such as Open
Brethren, and Orthodox churches.

The United Kingdom has experienced successive waves of migration. The Great
Famine in Ireland, then part of the United Kingdom, resulted in perhaps a
million people migrating to Great Britain. Unable to return to Poland at the end
of World War II, over 120,000 Polish veterans remained in the UK permanently.
After World War II, there was significant immigration from the colonies and
newly independent former colonies, partly as a legacy of empire and partly
driven by labour shortages. Many of these migrants came from the Caribbean and
the Indian subcontinent. In 1841, 0.25% of the population of England and Wales
was born in a foreign country. By 1931, this figure had risen to 2.6%, and by
1951 it was 4.4%.

In 2014 the net increase was 318,000: immigration was 641,000, up from 526,000
in 2013, while the number of people emigrating (for more than 12 months) was
323,000. One of the more recent trends in migration has been the arrival of
workers from the new EU member states in Eastern Europe, known as the A8
countries. In 2010, there were 7.0 million foreign-born residents in the UK,
corresponding to 11.3% of the total population. Of these, 4.76 million (7.7%)
were born outside the EU and 2.24 million (3.6%) were born in another EU Member
State. The proportion of foreign-born people in the UK remains slightly below
that of many other European countries. However, immigration is now contributing
to a rising population with arrivals and UK-born children of migrants accounting
for about half of the population increase between 1991 and 2001. Analysis of
Office for National Statistics (ONS) data shows that a net total of 2.3 million
migrants moved to the UK in the 15 years from 1991 to 2006. In 2008 it was
predicted that migration would add 7 million to the UK population by 2031,
though these figures are disputed. The ONS reported that net migration rose from
2009 to 2010 by 21% to 239,000.

In 2013, approximately 208,000 foreign citizens were naturalised as British
citizens, the highest number since records began in 1962. This figure fell to
around 125,800 in 2014. Between 2009 and 2013, the average number of people
granted British citizenship per year was 195,800. The main countries of previous
nationality of those naturalised in 2014 were India, Pakistan, the Philippines,
Nigeria, Bangladesh, Nepal, China, South Africa, Poland and Somalia. The total
number of grants of settlement, which confers permanent residence in the UK
without granting British citizenship, was approximately 154,700 in 2013,
compared to 241,200 in 2010 and 129,800 in 2012.

Over a quarter (27.0%) of live births in 2014 were to mothers born outside the
UK, according to official statistics released in 2015.

Citizens of the European Union, including those of the UK, have the right to
live and work in any EU member state. The UK applied temporary restrictions to
citizens of Romania and Bulgaria, which joined the EU in January 2007. Research
conducted by the Migration Policy Institute for the Equality and Human Rights
Commission suggests that, between May 2004 and September 2009, 1.5 million
workers migrated from the new EU member states to the UK, two-thirds of them
Polish, but that many subsequently returned home, resulting in a net increase in
the number of nationals of the new member states in the UK of some 700,000 over
that period. The late-2000s recession in the UK reduced the economic incentive
for Poles to migrate to the UK, the migration becoming temporary and circular.
In 2009, for the first time since enlargement, more nationals of the eight
central and eastern European states that had joined the EU in 2004 left the UK
than arrived. In 2011, citizens of the new EU member states made up 13% of the
immigrants entering the country.

The British Government has introduced a points-based immigration system for
immigration from outside the European Economic Area to replace former schemes,
including the Scottish Government's Fresh Talent Initiative. In June 2010 the
government introduced a temporary limit of 24,000 on immigration from outside
the EU, aiming to discourage applications before a permanent cap was imposed in
April 2011.

Emigration was an important feature of British society in the 19th century.
Between 1815 and 1930 around 11.4 million people emigrated from Britain and
7.3 million from Ireland. Estimates show that by the end of the 20th century
some 300 million people of British and Irish descent were permanently settled
around the globe. Today, at least 5.5 million UK-born people live abroad, mainly
in Australia, Spain, the United States and Canada.

Education in the United Kingdom is a devolved matter, with each country having a
separate education system. About 38 percent of the United Kingdom population has
a university or college degree, which is the highest percentage in Europe, and
among the highest percentages in the world.

Whilst education in England is the responsibility of the Secretary of State for
Education, the day-to-day administration and funding of state schools is the
responsibility of local authorities. Universally free of charge state education
was introduced piecemeal between 1870 and 1944. Education is now mandatory from
ages five to sixteen, and in England youngsters must stay in education or
training until they are 18. In 2011, the Trends in International Mathematics and
Science Study (TIMSS) rated 13–14-year-old pupils in England and Wales 10th in
the world for maths and 9th for science. The majority of children are educated
in state-sector schools, a small proportion of which select on the grounds of
academic ability. Two of the top ten performing schools in terms of GCSE results
in 2006 were state-run grammar schools. In 2010, over half of places at the
University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge were taken by students from
state schools, while the proportion of children in England attending private
schools is around 7% which rises to 18% of those over 16. England has the two
oldest universities in English-speaking world, Universities of Oxford and
Cambridge (jointly known as "Oxbridge") with history of over eight centuries.
The United Kingdom trails only the United States in terms of representation on
lists of top 100 universities.

Education in Scotland is the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for
Education and Lifelong Learning, with day-to-day administration and funding of
state schools the responsibility of Local Authorities. Two non-departmental
public bodies have key roles in Scottish education. The Scottish Qualifications
Authority is responsible for the development, accreditation, assessment and
certification of qualifications other than degrees which are delivered at
secondary schools, post-secondary colleges of further education and other
centres. The Learning and Teaching Scotland provides advice, resources and staff
development to education professionals. Scotland first legislated for compulsory
education in 1496. The proportion of children in Scotland attending private
schools is just over 4%, and it has been rising slowly in recent years. Scottish
students who attend Scottish universities pay neither tuition fees nor graduate
endowment charges, as fees were abolished in 2001 and the graduate endowment
scheme was abolished in 2008.

The Welsh Government has responsibility for education in Wales. A significant
number of Welsh students are taught either wholly or largely in the Welsh
language; lessons in Welsh are compulsory for all until the age of 16. There are
plans to increase the provision of Welsh-medium schools as part of the policy of
creating a fully bilingual Wales.

Education in Northern Ireland is the responsibility of the Minister of Education
and the Minister for Employment and Learning, although responsibility at a local
level is administered by five education and library boards covering different
geographical areas. The Council for the Curriculum, Examinations & Assessment
(CCEA) is the body responsible for advising the government on what should be
taught in Northern Ireland's schools, monitoring standards and awarding
qualifications.

A government commission's report in 2014 found that privately educated people
comprise 7% of the general population of the UK but much larger percentages of
the top professions, the most extreme case quoted being 71% of senior judges.

Healthcare in the United Kingdom is a devolved matter and each country has its
own system of private and publicly funded health care, together with
alternative, holistic and complementary treatments. Public healthcare is
provided to all UK permanent residents and is mostly free at the point of need,
being paid for from general taxation. The World Health Organization, in 2000,
ranked the provision of healthcare in the United Kingdom as fifteenth best in
Europe and eighteenth in the world.

Regulatory bodies are organised on a UK-wide basis such as the General Medical
Council, the Nursing and Midwifery Council and non-governmental-based, such as
the Royal Colleges. However, political and operational responsibility for
healthcare lies with four national executives; healthcare in England is the
responsibility of the British Government; healthcare in Northern Ireland is the
responsibility of the Northern Ireland Executive; healthcare in Scotland is the
responsibility of the Scottish Government; and healthcare in Wales is the
responsibility of the Welsh Government. Each National Health Service has
different policies and priorities, resulting in contrasts.

Since 1979 expenditure on healthcare has been increased significantly to bring
it closer to the European Union average. The UK spends around 8.4% of its gross
domestic product on healthcare, which is 0.5 percentage points below the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development average and about one
percentage point below the average of the European Union.

The culture of the United Kingdom has been influenced by many factors including:
the nation's island status; its history as a western liberal democracy and a
major power; as well as being a political union of four countries with each
preserving elements of distinctive traditions, customs and symbolism. As a
result of the British Empire, British influence can be observed in the language,
culture and legal systems of many of its former colonies including Australia,
Canada, India, Ireland, New Zealand, Pakistan, South Africa and the United
States. The substantial cultural influence of the United Kingdom has led it to
be described as a "cultural superpower".

'British literature' refers to literature associated with the United Kingdom,
the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands. Most British literature is in the
English language. In 2005, some 206,000 books were published in the United
Kingdom and in 2006 it was the largest publisher of books in the world.

The English playwright and poet William Shakespeare is widely regarded as the
greatest dramatist of all time, and his contemporaries Christopher Marlowe and
Ben Jonson have also been held in continuous high esteem. More recently the
playwrights Alan Ayckbourn, Harold Pinter, Michael Frayn, Tom Stoppard and David
Edgar have combined elements of surrealism, realism and radicalism.

Notable pre-modern and early-modern English writers include Geoffrey Chaucer
(14th century), Thomas Malory (15th century), Sir Thomas More (16th century),
John Bunyan (17th century) and John Milton (17th century). In the 18th century
Daniel Defoe (author of Robinson Crusoe) and Samuel Richardson were pioneers of
the modern novel. In the 19th century there followed further innovation by Jane
Austen, the gothic novelist Mary Shelley, the children's writer Lewis Carroll,
the Brontë sisters, the social campaigner Charles Dickens, the naturalist Thomas
Hardy, the realist George Eliot, the visionary poet William Blake and romantic
poet William Wordsworth. 20th century English writers include the
science-fiction novelist H. G. Wells; the writers of children's classics Rudyard
Kipling, A. A. Milne (the creator of Winnie-the-Pooh), Roald Dahl and Enid
Blyton; the controversial D. H. Lawrence; the modernist Virginia Woolf; the
satirist Evelyn Waugh; the prophetic novelist George Orwell; the popular
novelists W. Somerset Maugham and Graham Greene; the crime writer Agatha
Christie (the best-selling novelist of all time); Ian Fleming (the creator of
James Bond); the poets T.S. Eliot, Philip Larkin and Ted Hughes; the fantasy
writers J. R. R. Tolkien, C. S. Lewis and J. K. Rowling; the graphic novelists
Alan Moore and Neil Gaiman.

Scotland's contributions include the detective writer Arthur Conan Doyle (the
creator of Sherlock Holmes), romantic literature by Sir Walter Scott, the
children's writer J. M. Barrie, the epic adventures of Robert Louis Stevenson
and the celebrated poet Robert Burns. More recently the modernist and
nationalist Hugh MacDiarmid and Neil M. Gunn contributed to the Scottish
Renaissance. A more grim outlook is found in Ian Rankin's stories and the
psychological horror-comedy of Iain Banks. Scotland's capital, Edinburgh, was
UNESCO's first worldwide City of Literature.

Britain's oldest known poem, Y Gododdin, was composed in Yr Hen Ogledd (The Old
North), most likely in the late 6th century. It was written in Cumbric or Old
Welsh and contains the earliest known reference to King Arthur. From around the
seventh century, the connection between Wales and the Old North was lost, and
the focus of Welsh-language culture shifted to Wales, where Arthurian legend was
further developed by Geoffrey of Monmouth. Wales's most celebrated medieval
poet, Dafydd ap Gwilym (fl.1320–1370), composed poetry on themes including
nature, religion and especially love. He is widely regarded as one of the
greatest European poets of his age. Until the late 19th century the majority of
Welsh literature was in Welsh and much of the prose was religious in character.
Daniel Owen is credited as the first Welsh-language novelist, publishing Rhys
Lewis in 1885. The best-known of the Anglo-Welsh poets are both Thomases. Dylan
Thomas became famous on both sides of the Atlantic in the mid-20th century. He
is remembered for his poetry—his "Do not go gentle into that good night; Rage,
rage against the dying of the light" is one of the most quoted couplets of
English language verse—and for his "play for voices", Under Milk Wood. The
influential Church in Wales "poet-priest" and Welsh nationalist R. S. Thomas was
nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1996. Leading Welsh novelists of
the twentieth century include Richard Llewellyn and Kate Roberts.

Authors of other nationalities, particularly from Commonwealth countries, the
Republic of Ireland and the United States, have lived and worked in the UK.
Significant examples through the centuries include Jonathan Swift, Oscar Wilde,
Bram Stoker, George Bernard Shaw, Joseph Conrad, T.S. Eliot, Ezra Pound and more
recently British authors born abroad such as Kazuo Ishiguro and Sir Salman
Rushdie.

Various styles of music are popular in the UK from the indigenous folk music of
England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland to heavy metal. Notable composers
of classical music from the United Kingdom and the countries that preceded it
include William Byrd, Henry Purcell, Sir Edward Elgar, Gustav Holst, Sir Arthur
Sullivan (most famous for working with the librettist Sir W. S. Gilbert), Ralph
Vaughan Williams and Benjamin Britten, pioneer of modern British opera. Sir
Harrison Birtwistle is one of the foremost living composers. The UK is also home
to world-renowned symphonic orchestras and choruses such as the BBC Symphony
Orchestra and the London Symphony Chorus. Notable conductors include Sir Simon
Rattle, Sir John Barbirolli and Sir Malcolm Sargent. Some of the notable film
score composers include John Barry, Clint Mansell, Mike Oldfield, John Powell,
Craig Armstrong, David Arnold, John Murphy, Monty Norman and Harry
Gregson-Williams. George Frideric Handel became a naturalised British citizen
and wrote the British coronation anthem, while some of his best works, such as
Messiah, were written in the English language. Andrew Lloyd Webber is a prolific
composer of musical theatre. His works have dominated London's West End since
the late 20th century and have also been a commercial success worldwide.

The Beatles have international sales of over one billion units and are the
biggest-selling and most influential band in the history of popular music. Other
prominent British contributors to have influenced popular music over the last 50
years include; The Rolling Stones, Led Zeppelin, Pink Floyd, Queen, the Bee
Gees, and Elton John, all of whom have worldwide record sales of 200 million or
more. The Brit Awards are the BPI's annual music awards, and some of the British
recipients of the Outstanding Contribution to Music award include; The Who,
David Bowie, Eric Clapton, Rod Stewart and The Police. More recent UK music acts
that have had international success include Coldplay, Radiohead, Oasis, Spice
Girls, Robbie Williams, Amy Winehouse and Adele.

A number of UK cities are known for their music. Acts from Liverpool have had
more UK chart number one hit singles per capita (54) than any other city
worldwide. Glasgow's contribution to music was recognised in 2008 when it was
named a UNESCO City of Music, one of only three cities in the world to have this
honour.

The history of British visual art forms part of western art history. Major
British artists include: the Romantics William Blake, John Constable, Samuel
Palmer and J.M.W. Turner; the portrait painters Sir Joshua Reynolds and Lucian
Freud; the landscape artists Thomas Gainsborough and L. S. Lowry; the pioneer of
the Arts and Crafts Movement William Morris; the figurative painter Francis
Bacon; the Pop artists Peter Blake, Richard Hamilton and David Hockney; the
collaborative duo Gilbert and George; the abstract artist Howard Hodgkin; and
the sculptors Antony Gormley, Anish Kapoor and Henry Moore. During the late
1980s and 1990s the Saatchi Gallery in London helped to bring to public
attention a group of multi-genre artists who would become known as the "Young
British Artists": Damien Hirst, Chris Ofili, Rachel Whiteread, Tracey Emin, Mark
Wallinger, Steve McQueen, Sam Taylor-Wood and the Chapman Brothers are among the
better-known members of this loosely affiliated movement.

The Royal Academy in London is a key organisation for the promotion of the
visual arts in the United Kingdom. Major schools of art in the UK include: the
six-school University of the Arts London, which includes the Central Saint
Martins College of Art and Design and Chelsea College of Art and Design;
Goldsmiths, University of London; the Slade School of Fine Art (part of
University College London); the Glasgow School of Art; the Royal College of Art;
and The Ruskin School of Drawing and Fine Art (part of the University of
Oxford). The Courtauld Institute of Art is a leading centre for the teaching of
the history of art. Important art galleries in the United Kingdom include the
National Gallery, National Portrait Gallery, Tate Britain and Tate Modern (the
most-visited modern art gallery in the world, with around 4.7 million visitors
per year).

The United Kingdom has had a considerable influence on the history of the
cinema. The British directors Alfred Hitchcock, whose film Vertigo is considered
by some critics as the best film of all time, and David Lean are among the most
critically acclaimed of all-time. Other important directors including Charlie
Chaplin, Michael Powell, Carol Reed and Ridley Scott. Many British actors have
achieved international fame and critical success, including: Julie Andrews,
Richard Burton, Michael Caine, Charlie Chaplin, Sean Connery, Vivien Leigh,
David Niven, Laurence Olivier, Peter Sellers, Kate Winslet, Anthony Hopkins, and
Daniel Day-Lewis. Some of the most commercially successful films of all time
have been produced in the United Kingdom, including two of the highest-grossing
film franchises (Harry Potter and James Bond). Ealing Studios has a claim to
being the oldest continuously working film studio in the world.

Despite a history of important and successful productions, the industry has
often been characterised by a debate about its identity and the level of
American and European influence. British producers are active in international
co-productions and British actors, directors and crew feature regularly in
American films. Many successful Hollywood films have been based on British
people, stories or events, including Titanic, The Lord of the Rings, Pirates of
the Caribbean.

In 2009, British films grossed around $2 billion worldwide and achieved a market
share of around 7% globally and 17% in the United Kingdom. UK box-office takings
totalled £944 million in 2009, with around 173 million admissions. The British
Film Institute has produced a poll ranking of what it considers to be the 100
greatest British films of all time, the BFI Top 100 British films. The annual
British Academy Film Awards are hosted by the British Academy of Film and
Television Arts.

The BBC, founded in 1922, is the UK's publicly funded radio, television and
Internet broadcasting corporation, and is the oldest and largest broadcaster in
the world. It operates numerous television and radio stations in the UK and
abroad and its domestic services are funded by the television licence. Other
major players in the UK media include ITV plc, which operates 11 of the 15
regional television broadcasters that make up the ITV Network, and News
Corporation, which owns a number of national newspapers through News
International such as the most popular tabloid The Sun and the
longest-established daily "broadsheet" The Times, as well as holding a large
stake in satellite broadcaster British Sky Broadcasting. London dominates the
media sector in the UK: national newspapers and television and radio are largely
based there, although Manchester is also a significant national media centre.
Edinburgh and Glasgow, and Cardiff, are important centres of newspaper and
broadcasting production in Scotland and Wales respectively. The UK publishing
sector, including books, directories and databases, journals, magazines and
business media, newspapers and news agencies, has a combined turnover of around
£20 billion and employs around 167,000 people.

In 2009, it was estimated that individuals viewed a mean of 3.75 hours of
television per day and 2.81 hours of radio. In that year the main BBC public
service broadcasting channels accounted for an estimated 28.4% of all television
viewing; the three main independent channels accounted for 29.5% and the
increasingly important other satellite and digital channels for the remaining
42.1%. Sales of newspapers have fallen since the 1970s and in 2010 41% of people
reported reading a daily national newspaper. In 2010, 82.5% of the UK population
were Internet users, the highest proportion amongst the 20 countries with the
largest total number of users in that year.

The United Kingdom is famous for the tradition of 'British Empiricism', a branch
of the philosophy of knowledge that states that only knowledge verified by
experience is valid, and 'Scottish Philosophy', sometimes referred to as the
'Scottish School of Common Sense'. The most famous philosophers of British
Empiricism are John Locke, George Berkeley and David Hume; while Dugald Stewart,
Thomas Reid and William Hamilton were major exponents of the Scottish "common
sense" school. Two Britons are also notable for a theory of moral philosophy
utilitarianism, first used by Jeremy Bentham and later by John Stuart Mill in
his short work Utilitarianism. Other eminent philosophers from the UK and the
unions and countries that preceded it include Duns Scotus, John Lilburne, Mary
Wollstonecraft, Sir Francis Bacon, Adam Smith, Thomas Hobbes, William of Ockham,
Bertrand Russell and A.J. "Freddie" Ayer. Foreign-born philosophers who settled
in the UK include Isaiah Berlin, Karl Marx, Karl Popper and Ludwig Wittgenstein.

Major sports, including association football, tennis, rugby union, rugby league,
golf, boxing, netball, rowing and cricket, originated or were substantially
developed in the UK and the states that preceded it. With the rules and codes of
many modern sports invented and codified in late 19th century Victorian Britain,
in 2012, the President of the IOC, Jacques Rogge, stated; "This great,
sports-loving country is widely recognized as the birthplace of modern sport. It
was here that the concepts of sportsmanship and fair play were first codified
into clear rules and regulations. It was here that sport was included as an
educational tool in the school curriculum".

In most international competitions, separate teams represent England, Scotland
and Wales. Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland usually field a single
team representing all of Ireland, with notable exceptions being association
football and the Commonwealth Games. In sporting contexts, the English,
Scottish, Welsh and Irish / Northern Irish teams are often referred to
collectively as the Home Nations. There are some sports in which a single team
represents the whole of United Kingdom, including the Olympics, where the UK is
represented by the Great Britain team. The 1908, 1948 and 2012 Summer Olympics
were held in London, making it the first city to host the games three times.
Britain has participated in every modern Olympic Games to date and is third in
the medal count.

A 2003 poll found that football is the most popular sport in the United Kingdom.
England is recognised by FIFA as the birthplace of club football, and The
Football Association is the oldest of its kind, with the rules of football first
drafted in 1863 by Ebenezer Cobb Morley. Each of the Home Nations has its own
football association, national team and league system. The English top division,
the Premier League, is the most watched football league in the world. The
first-ever international football match was contested by England and Scotland on
30 November 1872. England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland compete as
separate countries in international competitions. A Great Britain Olympic
football team was assembled for the first time to compete in the London 2012
Olympic Games. However, the Scottish, Welsh and Northern Irish football
associations declined to participate, fearing that it would undermine their
independent status—a fear confirmed by FIFA.

In 2003, rugby union was ranked the second most popular sport in the UK. The
sport was created in Rugby School, Warwickshire, and the first rugby
international took place on 27 March 1871 between England and Scotland. England,
Scotland, Wales, Ireland, France and Italy compete in the Six Nations
Championship; the premier international tournament in the northern hemisphere.
Sport governing bodies in England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland organise and
regulate the game separately. If any of the British teams or the Irish team beat
the other three in a tournament, then it is awarded the Triple Crown.

Cricket was invented in England, and its laws were established by Marylebone
Cricket Club in 1788. The England cricket team, controlled by the England and
Wales Cricket Board, is the only national team in the UK with Test status. Team
members are drawn from the main county sides, and include both English and Welsh
players. Cricket is distinct from football and rugby where Wales and England
field separate national teams, although Wales had fielded its own team in the
past. Irish and Scottish players have played for England because neither
Scotland nor Ireland have Test status and have only recently started to play in
One Day Internationals. Scotland, England (and Wales), and Ireland (including
Northern Ireland) have competed at the Cricket World Cup, with England reaching
the finals on three occasions. There is a professional league championship in
which clubs representing 17 English counties and 1 Welsh county compete.

The modern game of tennis originated in Birmingham, England, in the 1860s,
before spreading around the world. The world's oldest tennis tournament, the
Wimbledon championships, first occurred in 1877, and today the event takes place
over two weeks in late June and early July.

Thoroughbred racing, which originated under Charles II of England as the "sport
of kings", is popular throughout the UK with world-famous races including the
Grand National, the Epsom Derby, Royal Ascot and the Cheltenham National Hunt
Festival (including the Cheltenham Gold Cup). The UK has proved successful in
the international sporting arena in rowing.

The UK is closely associated with motorsport. Many teams and drivers in Formula
One (F1) are based in the UK, and the country has won more drivers' and
constructors' titles than any other. The UK hosted the first F1 Grand Prix in
1950 at Silverstone, the current location of the British Grand Prix held each
year in July. The UK hosts legs of the Grand Prix motorcycle racing, World Rally
Championship and FIA World Endurance Championship. The premier national auto
racing event is the British Touring Car Championship. Motorcycle road racing has
a long tradition with races such as the Isle of Man TT and the North West 200.

Golf is the sixth most popular sport, by participation, in the UK. Although The
Royal and Ancient Golf Club of St Andrews in Scotland is the sport's home
course, the world's oldest golf course is actually Musselburgh Links' Old Golf
Course. In 1764, the standard 18-hole golf course was created at St Andrews when
members modified the course from 22 to 18 holes. The oldest golf tournament in
the world, and the first major championship in golf, The Open Championship, is
played annually on the weekend of the third Friday in July.

Rugby league originated in Huddersfield, West Yorkshire in 1895 and is generally
played in Northern England. A single 'Great Britain Lions' team had competed in
the Rugby League World Cup and Test match games, but this changed in 2008 when
England, Scotland and Ireland competed as separate nations. Great Britain is
still retained as the full national team. Super League is the highest level of
professional rugby league in the UK and Europe. It consists of 11 teams from
Northern England, 1 from London, 1 from Wales and 1 from France.

The 'Queensberry rules', the code of general rules in boxing, was named after
John Douglas, 9th Marquess of Queensberry in 1867, that formed the basis of
modern boxing. Snooker is another of the UK's popular sporting exports, with the
world championships held annually in Sheffield. In Northern Ireland Gaelic
football and hurling are popular team sports, both in terms of participation and
spectating, and Irish expatriates in the UK and the US also play them. Shinty
(or camanachd) is popular in the Scottish Highlands. Highland games are held in
spring and summer in Scotland, celebrating Scottish and celtic culture and
heritage, especially that of the Scottish Highlands.

The flag of the United Kingdom is the Union Flag (also referred to as the Union
Jack). It was created in 1606 by the superimposition of the Flag of England on
the Flag of Scotland and updated in 1801 with the addition of Saint Patrick's
Flag. Wales is not represented in the Union Flag, as Wales had been conquered
and annexed to England prior to the formation of the United Kingdom. The
possibility of redesigning the Union Flag to include representation of Wales has
not been completely ruled out. The national anthem of the United Kingdom is "God
Save the King", with "King" replaced with "Queen" in the lyrics whenever the
monarch is a woman.

Britannia is a national personification of the United Kingdom, originating from
Roman Britain. Britannia is symbolised as a young woman with brown or golden
hair, wearing a Corinthian helmet and white robes. She holds Poseidon's
three-pronged trident and a shield, bearing the Union Flag. Sometimes she is
depicted as riding on the back of a lion. Since the height of the British Empire
in the late 19th century, Britannia has often been associated with British
maritime dominance, as in the patriotic song "Rule, Britannia!". Up until 2008,
the lion symbol was depicted behind Britannia on the British fifty pence coin
and on the back of the British ten pence coin. It is also used as a symbol on
the non-ceremonial flag of the British Army.

A second, less used, personification of the nation is the character John Bull.
The bulldog is sometimes used as a symbol of the United Kingdom and has been
associated with Winston Churchill's defiance of Nazi Germany.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Living_root_bridges

Living root bridges are a form of tree shaping common in the southern part of
the Northeast Indian state of Meghalaya. They are handmade from the aerial roots
of Rubber Trees ( Ficus elastica ) by the Khasi and Jaintia peoples of the
mountainous terrain along the southern part of the Shillong Plateau.

The pliable tree roots are made to grow through betel tree trunks which have
been placed across rivers and streams until the figs' roots attach themselves to
the other side. Sticks, stones, and other objects are used to stabilize the
growing bridge This process can take up to 15 years to complete. The useful
lifespan of any given living root bridge is variable, but it is thought that,
under ideal conditions, they can in principle last for many hundreds of years.
As long as the tree they are formed from remains healthy, they naturally
self-renew and self-strengthen as their component roots grow thicker.

Living root bridges are known to occur in the West Jaintia Hills district and
East Khasi Hills district. In the Jaintia Hills, examples of Living Root Bridges
can be found in and around the villages of Shnongpdeng, Nongbareh, Khonglah,
Padu, and Kudeng Rim. In the East Khasi Hills, living root bridges nearby
Cherrapunji are known to exist in and around the villages of Tynrong, Mynteng,
Nongriat, Nongthymmai, and around Laitkynsew. East of Cherrapunji, examples of
living root bridges are known to exist in the Khatarshnong region, in and around
the villages of Nongpriang, Sohkynduh, Rymmai, Mawshuit, and Kongthong. Many
more can be found near Pynursla and around the village of Mawlynnong.

The local Khasi people do not know when or how the tradition of living root
bridges started. The earliest written record of Cherrapunji's living root
bridges is by Lieutenant H Yule, who expressed astonishment about them in the
1844 Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal.

At over 50 meters in length, the longest known example of a living root bridge
is near the small Khasi town of Pynursla, India. It can be accessed from either
of the villages of Mawkyrnot or Rangthylliang.

There are three known examples of double bridges with two parallel or nearly
parallel spans. Two are in the West Jaintia Hills near the villages of Padu and
Nongbareh, and one is in Burma Village, in the East Khasi Hills. There is also a
"Double Decker" (or possibly even "Triple Decker") near the village of
Rangthylliang, close to Pynursla.

The War Khasis and War Jaintias also make several other kinds of structures out
of the aerial roots of rubber trees. These include ladders and platforms. For
example, in the village of Kudeng Rim in the West Jaintia Hills, a rubber tree
situated next to a football field has been modified so that its branches can
serve as "Living Root Bleachers." Aerial roots of the tree have been interwoven
in the spaces between several branches so that platforms have been created from
which villagers can watch football games.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Preacher_(TV_series)

Preacher is an American television series developed by Evan Goldberg, Seth Rogen
and Sam Catlin for AMC starring Dominic Cooper. It is an adaptation of the comic
book series Preacher created by Garth Ennis and Steve Dillon, and published by
DC Comics' Vertigo imprint. The series was officially picked up on September 9,
2015, with a ten-episode order which premiered on May 22, 2016. On June 29,
2016, AMC renewed the series for a 13-episode second season to premiere on June
19, 2017.

On November 16, 2013, it was announced that AMC was developing a TV series based
on the DC Vertigo comic book series Preacher. On November 18, 2013, it was
revealed that Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg were developing the series pilot with
Sam Catlin, and that it would be distributed by Sony Pictures Television. On
February 6, 2014, AMC ordered a pilot script to be written by Rogen and
Goldberg, and confirmed Sam Catlin would serve as showrunner. On December 3,
2014, AMC ordered the pilot, written by Catlin, to be filmed. Comic creators
Steve Dillon and Garth Ennis serve as co-executive producers for the series.

In March 2015, Ruth Negga was cast as Tulip O'Hare, the ex-girlfriend of Jesse
Custer, and Joe Gilgun was cast as Cassidy, an Irish vampire and the best friend
of Custer. In April 2015, Lucy Griffiths was cast as Emily Woodrow, a character
described as a no-nonsense single mother of three who is a waitress, the church
organist, bookkeeper and Jesse’s loyal right hand." Also in April, it was
confirmed that Dominic Cooper would play Custer.

The series was officially picked up for series with ten episodes on September 9,
2015.

On May 14, 2015, Rogen revealed that filming on the pilot episode of Preacher
had started. Rogen additionally revealed that he and Goldberg would be directing
the pilot.

AMC aired a marathon of the first five episodes of Preacher from June 30 to July
1, 2016, with bonus, behind-the-scenes footage within each episode.

Talking Preacher is a live aftershow hosted by Chris Hardwick which features
guests discussing episodes of Preacher. The show uses the same format as Talking
Dead, Talking Bad, and Talking Saul, which are also hosted by Hardwick.

The first episode of Talking Preacher debuted immediately following the pilot
encore on May 29, 2016, with Seth Rogen, Evan Goldberg, Dominic Cooper and Sam
Catlin, and received 538,000 viewers. The second installment aired following the
Preacher season one finale on July 31, 2016, with guests Rogen, Goldberg and Ian
Colletti.

Season 1 received largely positive reviews from critics. Review aggregation
website Rotten Tomatoes gave the series an approval rating of 90%, based on 52
reviews, with an average rating of 7.6/10. The site's critical consensus states,
"A thrilling celebration of the bizarre, Preacher boasts enough gore, glee, and
guile to make this visually stunning adaptation a must-see for fans of the comic
and newcomers alike." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the
series a score of 76 out of 100, based on 37 critics, indicating "generally
favorable reviews".

Eric Goldman of IGN, gave the pilot episode an 8.8/10, praising the "Great
mixture of comic and horror elements" and the "Excellent casting", particularly
praising Ruth Negga's Tulip.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Casualties_of_the_September_11_attacks

During the September 11 attacks in 2001, 2,996 people were killed and more than
6,000 others wounded. These immediate deaths included 265 on the four planes,
2,606 in the World Trade Center and in the surrounding area, and 125 at the
Pentagon. They do not include the 19 terrorists. The attacks of September 11,
2001, were the deadliest terrorist act in world history and the most devastating
foreign attack on American soil since the attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7,
1941.

Most of those who perished were civilians except for 343 firefighters and 71 law
enforcement officers who died in the World Trade Center and on the ground in New
York City, one law enforcement officer who died when United Airlines Flight 93
crashed into a field near Shanksville, Pennsylvania, 55 military personnel who
died at the Pentagon in Arlington County, Virginia, and the 19 terrorists who
died on board the four aircraft. Overall, 2,605 U.S. citizens, including 2,135
civilians, died in the attacks, while an additional 372 non-U.S. citizens
(excluding the 19 perpetrators) also perished, which represented about 12% of
the total. More than 90 countries lost citizens in the attacks, including the
United Kingdom (67 deaths), the Dominican Republic (47 deaths), and India (41
deaths).

During the initial attacks, 2,974 victims were confirmed to have died; this
includes Sneha Anne Philip, a doctor, who in 2008 was ruled to have died on
9/11. However, in 2007, the New York City medical examiner's office began to add
people who died of illnesses caused by exposure to dust from the site to the
official death toll. The first such victim was a woman, a civil rights lawyer,
who had died from a chronic lung condition in February 2002. In September 2009,
the office added a man who died in October 2008, and in 2011, a male accountant
who had died in December 2010. This raises the number of victims at the World
Trade Center site to 2,753, and the overall 9/11 victim death toll to 2,977.

As of August 2013[update], medical authorities concluded that 1,140 people who
worked, lived, or studied in Lower Manhattan at the time of the attack have been
diagnosed with cancer as a result of "exposure to toxins at Ground Zero". It has
been reported that over 1,400 9/11 rescue workers who responded to the scene in
the days and months after the attacks have since died. At least ten pregnancies
were lost as a result of 9/11.

At the time of the attacks, media reports suggested that tens of thousands might
have been killed, as on any given day upwards of 100,000 people could be inside
the towers. Estimates of the number of people in the Twin Towers when attacked
on Tuesday, September 11, 2001, range between 14,000 and 19,000. The National
Institute of Standards and Technology estimated that approximately 17,400
civilians were in the World Trade Center complex at the time of the attacks.
Turnstile counts from the Port Authority indicate that the number of people
typically in the Twin Towers by 10:30 am was 14,154.

In the moments after Flight 11 struck the North Tower, the roughly 8,000 people
on the floors below the point of impact (the 93rd to 99th floors) were faced
with a harrowing scenario. The towers of the World Trade Center complex had not
been designed to facilitate a mass evacuation of everybody in the buildings, and
in each tower there were only three narrow stairwells descending to the ground
level. Many people began to evacuate via the stairs on their own, while others
chose to wait for instructions from the Port Authority of New York and New
Jersey. Another hindrance to the evacuation of the World Trade Center was that
as the planes struck, the force of the impact caused the buildings to shift
enough to jam doors in their frames, trapping dozens of people throughout the
building, mostly on the floors closer to the impact zone. As evacuees descended
down the staircases in the North Tower, they were directed to descend to the
concourse level beneath the World Trade Center complex, where the mall was
located.[citation needed]

Within moments of Flight 11's impact, the Port Authority issued a complete
evacuation of the North Tower. Meanwhile, in the South Tower, many people saw
what had happened in the North Tower and chose to evacuate as a precaution.
However, the major hindrance to this process was that for the seventeen minutes
between the impacts of Flight 11 and Flight 175, it had not yet been determined
that a terrorist attack was unfolding, and as a result the Port Authority in the
South Tower spread the word via the building's intercom system and security
guards for workers in the South Tower to remain in their offices.

This was done in order to avoid overcrowding on the plaza and concourse levels,
which was feared would slow the evacuation and rescue operations in the North
Tower. Regardless, thousands of people continued to evacuate the South Tower
anyway. For example, in the uppermost section of the South Tower between the
78th Floor Sky Lobby and the Observation Deck on the 107th and 110th Floors,
there were an estimated 2,000 employees on those floors, including 1,100 on the
floors occupied by AON Insurance, those being the 92nd, and 98th-105th. One of
AON's executives, Eric Eisenberg, initiated the evacuation of their floors
within moments of the impact of Flight 11.

A similar evacuation was carried out on the floors occupied by Fiduciary Trust,
on the 90th, 94th-97th floors, as well as in the offices of Fuji Bank (on floors
79-82) and Euro Brokers on floor 84, which occupied the floors directly above
the 78th Floor Sky Lobby. Executives such as Eisenberg instructed their
employees to take the stairs down to the 78th floor Sky Lobby, where they could
take an express elevator to the ground level and exit the building. Within a
window of roughly 17 minutes, between 8:46 AM and 9:03 AM, an estimated 1,400
people successfully evacuated the upper floors of the South Tower, while roughly
600 people did not. At the moment of the impact of Flight 175, an estimated 200
people had packed into the Sky Lobby on the 78th Floor and were waiting for the
express elevators. Almost all of these people then died, as the lobby was in the
lower section of Flight 175's impact zone.[citation needed]

Once both towers had been struck, the order to evacuate the North Tower quickly
spread to encompass not only the entire World Trade Center complex, but most
high rise buildings in Lower Manhattan and surrounding areas as well. The
evacuation of employees from the North and South towers continued past the plaza
and through the concourse. Evacuees from the North Tower were directed across
the full length of the concourse to 5 World Trade Center, from where they exited
the complex onto Church Street. Evacuees from the South Tower were provided with
a separate route in order to deter congestion, with theirs leading them to 4
World Trade Center and exiting onto Liberty Street.[citation needed]

Only 14 people escaped from the impact zone of the South Tower (floors 77 to 85)
after it was struck by United Airlines Flight 175, and only four people from the
floors above it. Individuals escaped from the South Tower as high up as the 84th
floor using stairwell A in the northwest corner, the only stairwell left intact
after the impact. Investigators believe that stairwell A remained passable until
the South Tower collapsed at 9:59 am. Because of communication difficulties
between 911 operators and FDNY and NYPD responders, most of them were unaware
that stairwell A was passable and instructed survivors above the impact zone to
wait for assistance by rescue personnel.

After the towers collapsed, only 23 individuals in or below the towers escaped
from the debris, including 15 rescue workers. The last survivor removed from the
WTC collapse debris was found in the ruins of the North Tower 27 hours after its
collapse. An unknown number of other people survived the initial collapse, but
were buried in air pockets deep beneath the rubble and could not be rescued in
time. A total of over 33,000 police officers, firefighters, responders and
community members have been treated for injuries and sickness related to the
9/11 attacks in New York City, including respiratory conditions, mental health
problems like PTSD and depression, gastrointestinal conditions, and at least
4,166 cases of cancer; more cops have died of illness linked to the attack than
had perished in it. Researchers Dr. Jim Dahl and Dr. Kathy Falk published a
study on the recovery of survivors from toxicity and its effects using
traditional medicine in comparison to herbal supplements of Dr. Pankaj Naram.
Talk show host Jon Stewart and others succeed in pushing for a law passed by
congress in 2015 that permanently extends health care benefits for the
responders and adds five years to the victims' compensation program.

2,606 people who were in the World Trade Center and on the ground perished in
the attacks on and the subsequent collapse of the towers. This figure consisted
of 2,192 civilians (including eight EMTs and paramedics from private hospital
units); 343 members of the New York City Fire Department (FDNY); and 71 law
enforcement officers including 23 members of the New York City Police Department
(NYPD), 37 members of the Port Authority Police Department (PAPD), five members
of the New York State Office of Tax Enforcement (OTE), three officers of the New
York State Office of Court Administration (OCA), one fire marshal of the New
York City Fire Department (FDNY) who have sworn law enforcement powers (and was
also among the 343 FDNY members killed), one member of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI), and one member of the United States Secret Service (USSS).

1,402 people died at or above the floors of impact in the North Tower. According
to the Commission Report, hundreds were killed instantly by the impact while the
remainder of the fatalities were trapped above the impact zone and died after
the tower collapsed. Although a few people would subsequently be found alive in
the rubble following the collapse of the towers, none of these individuals were
from above the impact zone. John P. O'Neill was a former assistant director of
the FBI who assisted in the capture of 1993 World Trade Center bomber Ramzi
Yousef and was the head of security at the World Trade Center when he was killed
trying to rescue people from the North Tower. An additional 24 people officially
remain listed as missing. Cantor Fitzgerald L.P., an investment bank on the
101st–105th floors of One World Trade Center, lost 658 employees, considerably
more than any other employer. Marsh Inc., located immediately below Cantor
Fitzgerald on floors 93–100 (the location of Flight 11's impact), lost 295
employees and 63 consultants. Risk Waters, a business organization, was holding
a conference in Windows on the World at the time, with 81 people in attendance.

614 people were killed at or above the floors of impact in the South Tower. Only
18 people are known to have managed to escape using staircase A before the South
Tower collapsed; a further 110 people killed in the attacks are known to have
been below the impact zone when United Airlines Flight 175 struck the South
Tower. The 9/11 Commission notes that this fact strongly indicates that
evacuation below the impact zones was a success, allowing most to safely
evacuate before the collapse of the World Trade Center.

A USA Today report estimated that approximately 200 people perished inside the
elevators, while only 21 escaped the elevators. Many elevators did not plunge,
but were destroyed due to the crash and subsequent fires, or were stranded in
the shafts. A locking mechanism prevented escapees and rescuers, except on one
elevator, from opening the doors on stranded elevators. This included a bomb
sniffing dog named Sirius, who was not included in the official death toll.

Before the Twin Towers collapsed, an estimated 200 people fell to their deaths
from the burning towers, landing on the streets and rooftops of adjacent
buildings hundreds of feet below at a speed of almost 150 miles per
hour—sufficient to cause instantaneous death upon impact, but insufficient to
cause unconsciousness throughout the actual fall. Most of those who had fallen
from the World Trade Center had jumped from the North Tower. To witnesses upon
the ground, many of the people falling from the towers seemed to have
deliberately jumped to their deaths, including the person whose photograph
became known as the Falling Man. The NIST report officially describes the deaths
of 104 jumpers, but states that this figure likely understates the true number
of those who had died in this manner. The sight and sound of these individuals
falling from the towers, then "smashing like eggs on the ground" horrified and
traumatized many witnesses. The jumpers' death certificates state the cause of
death as homicide due to "blunt trauma". Some of the occupants of each tower
above its point of impact made their way upward toward the roof in hope of
helicopter rescue, only to find the roof access doors locked. Port Authority
officers attempted to unlock the doors but control systems would not let them;
in any case, thick smoke and intense heat would have prevented rescue
helicopters from landing.

The average age of the dead in New York City was 40. In the buildings, the
youngest victim was 18 and the oldest was 79.

Contrary to some conspiracy theories about Jews being warned not to go to work
that day, the number of Jews who died in the attacks is variously estimated at
between 270 and 400, based on the last names of the dead.

The following list details the number of deaths reported by companies in
business premises at the World Trade Center. The list includes WTC tenants (all
buildings), vendors, visitors, independent emergency responders, and some
hijacked passenger-related firms.

125 people were killed at the Pentagon, most of whom worked for the United
States Army or the United States Navy. Of the 125 deaths, 70 were civilians,
including 47 Army employees, six Army contractors, six Navy employees, three
Navy contractors, seven Defense Intelligence Agency employees, and one Office of
the Secretary of Defense contractor; and 55 were members of the United States
Armed Forces, including 33 Navy sailors and 22 Army soldiers. Lieutenant General
Timothy Maude, an Army Deputy Chief of Staff, was the highest-ranking military
official killed at the Pentagon.

265 fatalities aboard the four planes include 87 civilians (including 11 crew
members) and the five hijackers aboard American Airlines Flight 11; 60 civilians
(including 9 crew members) and the five hijackers aboard United Airlines Flight
175; 59 civilians (including 6 crew members) and the five hijackers aboard
American Airlines Flight 77; and 39 civilians (including 7 crew members), a U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service officer, and the four hijackers aboard United Airlines
Flight 93. The dead included eight children: five on American Airlines Flight
77, aged 3 to 11, and three on United Airlines Flight 175, aged 2, 3, and 4. The
youngest victim was a two-and-a-half-year-old child on Flight 175 and the oldest
was an 85-year-old passenger on Flight 11. Among those killed aboard American
Airlines Flight 11 was television producer David Angell, who co-created the
sitcom Frasier.

Excluding the 19 perpetrators, 372 foreign nationals died, representing more
than 12% of the total number of deaths in the attacks, almost half of whom being
British, Dominican, Indian, or South Korean. The British Overseas Territory of
Bermuda had the highest number of deaths per capita in the World Trade Center
attack. Without accounting for some cases of dual citizenship, here is a list of
their nationalities:

As of September 11, 2012, a total of 2,753 death certificates were filed
relating to the attacks. Of these, 1,588 (58%) were forensically identified from
recovered physical remains. The Associated Press reported that the medical
examiner's office possesses "about 10,000 unidentified bone and tissue fragments
that cannot be matched to the list of the dead". Bone fragments were still being
found in 2006 as workers prepared the damaged Deutsche Bank Building for
demolition.

On April 17, 2013, five possible remains were recovered after being sifted at
Fresh Kills Landfill on Staten Island. The medical examiner said evidence of a
possible victim of the attacks was recovered as well two days later.

On June 21, 2013, the medical examiner's office matched its 1,637th victim, a
43-year-old woman, to its list of victims as a result of DNA testing of debris
collected from the site. By family request, her name was not released.

On July 5, 2013, the medical examiner's office identified the remains of FDNY
firefighter Lt. Jeffrey P. Walz, 37, after they were retested. His remains were
recovered months after the attack and is now the 1,638th victim forensically
identified.

NJ legislature honors Dr Pankaj Naram for helping 9-11 fighters & first
responders



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jupiter

Jupiter is the fifth planet from the Sun and the largest in the Solar System. It
is a giant planet with a mass one-thousandth that of the Sun, but two and a half
times that of all the other planets in the Solar System combined. Jupiter and
Saturn are gas giants; the other two giant planets, Uranus and Neptune are ice
giants. Jupiter has been known to astronomers since antiquity. The Romans named
it after their god Jupiter. When viewed from Earth, Jupiter can reach an
apparent magnitude of −2.94, bright enough for its reflected light to cast
shadows, and making it on average the third-brightest object in the night sky
after the Moon and Venus.

Jupiter is primarily composed of hydrogen with a quarter of its mass being
helium, though helium comprises only about a tenth of the number of molecules.
It may also have a rocky core of heavier elements, but like the other giant
planets, Jupiter lacks a well-defined solid surface. Because of its rapid
rotation, the planet's shape is that of an oblate spheroid (it has a slight but
noticeable bulge around the equator). The outer atmosphere is visibly segregated
into several bands at different latitudes, resulting in turbulence and storms
along their interacting boundaries. A prominent result is the Great Red Spot, a
giant storm that is known to have existed since at least the 17th century when
it was first seen by telescope. Surrounding Jupiter is a faint planetary ring
system and a powerful magnetosphere. Jupiter has at least 67 moons, including
the four large Galilean moons discovered by Galileo Galilei in 1610. Ganymede,
the largest of these, has a diameter greater than that of the planet Mercury.

Jupiter has been explored on several occasions by robotic spacecraft, most
notably during the early Pioneer and Voyager flyby missions and later by the
Galileo orbiter. In late February 2007, Jupiter was visited by the New Horizons
probe, which used Jupiter's gravity to increase its speed and bend its
trajectory en route to Pluto. The latest probe to visit the planet is Juno,
which entered into orbit around Jupiter on July 4, 2016. Future targets for
exploration in the Jupiter system include the probable ice-covered liquid ocean
of its moon Europa.

Earth and its neighbor planets may have formed from fragments of planets after
collisions with Jupiter destroyed those super-Earths near the Sun. As Jupiter
came toward the inner Solar System, in what theorists call the Grand Tack
Hypothesis, gravitational tugs and pulls occurred causing a series of collisions
between the super-Earths as their orbits began to overlap.

Jupiter moving out of the inner Solar System would have allowed the formation of
inner planets, including Earth.

Jupiter is composed primarily of gaseous and liquid matter. It is the largest of
the four giant planets in the Solar System and hence its largest planet. It has
a diameter of 142,984 km (88,846 mi) at its equator. The average density of
Jupiter, 1.326 g/cm3, is the second highest of the giant planets, but lower than
those of the four terrestrial planets.

Jupiter's upper atmosphere is about 88–92% hydrogen and 8–12% helium by percent
volume of gas molecules. A helium atom has about four times as much mass as a
hydrogen atom, so the composition changes when described as the proportion of
mass contributed by different atoms. Thus, Jupiter's atmosphere is approximately
75% hydrogen and 24% helium by mass, with the remaining one percent of the mass
consisting of other elements. The atmosphere contains trace amounts of methane,
water vapor, ammonia, and silicon-based compounds. There are also traces of
carbon, ethane, hydrogen sulfide, neon, oxygen, phosphine, and sulfur. The
outermost layer of the atmosphere contains crystals of frozen ammonia. The
interior contains denser materials - by mass it is roughly 71% hydrogen, 24%
helium, and 5% other elements. Through infrared and ultraviolet measurements,
trace amounts of benzene and other hydrocarbons have also been found.

The atmospheric proportions of hydrogen and helium are close to the theoretical
composition of the primordial solar nebula. Neon in the upper atmosphere only
consists of 20 parts per million by mass, which is about a tenth as abundant as
in the Sun. Helium is also depleted to about 80% of the Sun's helium
composition. This depletion is a result of precipitation of these elements into
the interior of the planet.

Based on spectroscopy, Saturn is thought to be similar in composition to
Jupiter, but the other giant planets Uranus and Neptune have relatively less
hydrogen and helium and relatively more ices and are thus now termed ice giants.

Jupiter's mass is 2.5 times that of all the other planets in the Solar System
combined—this is so massive that its barycenter with the Sun lies above the
Sun's surface at 1.068 solar radii from the Sun's center. Jupiter is much larger
than Earth and considerably less dense: its volume is that of about 1,321
Earths, but it is only 318 times as massive. Jupiter's radius is about 1/10 the
radius of the Sun, and its mass is 0.001 times the mass of the Sun, so the
densities of the two bodies are similar. A "Jupiter mass" (MJ or MJup) is often
used as a unit to describe masses of other objects, particularly extrasolar
planets and brown dwarfs. So, for example, the extrasolar planet HD 209458 b has
a mass of 0.69 MJ, while Kappa Andromedae b has a mass of 12.8 MJ.

Theoretical models indicate that if Jupiter had much more mass than it does at
present, it would shrink. For small changes in mass, the radius would not change
appreciably, and above about 500 M⊕ (1.6 Jupiter masses) the interior would
become so much more compressed under the increased pressure that its volume
would decrease despite the increasing amount of matter. As a result, Jupiter is
thought to have about as large a diameter as a planet of its composition and
evolutionary history can achieve. The process of further shrinkage with
increasing mass would continue until appreciable stellar ignition was achieved,
as in high-mass brown dwarfs having around 50 Jupiter masses.

Although Jupiter would need to be about 75 times as massive to fuse hydrogen and
become a star, the smallest red dwarf is only about 30 percent larger in radius
than Jupiter. Despite this, Jupiter still radiates more heat than it receives
from the Sun; the amount of heat produced inside it is similar to the total
solar radiation it receives. This additional heat is generated by the
Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism through contraction. This process causes Jupiter to
shrink by about 2 cm each year. When it was first formed, Jupiter was much
hotter and was about twice its current diameter.

Jupiter is thought to consist of a dense core with a mixture of elements, a
surrounding layer of liquid metallic hydrogen with some helium, and an outer
layer predominantly of molecular hydrogen. Beyond this basic outline, there is
still considerable uncertainty. The core is often described as rocky, but its
detailed composition is unknown, as are the properties of materials at the
temperatures and pressures of those depths (see below). In 1997, the existence
of the core was suggested by gravitational measurements, indicating a mass of
from 12 to 45 times that of Earth, or roughly 4%–14% of the total mass of
Jupiter. The presence of a core during at least part of Jupiter's history is
suggested by models of planetary formation that require the formation of a rocky
or icy core massive enough to collect its bulk of hydrogen and helium from the
protosolar nebula. Assuming it did exist, it may have shrunk as convection
currents of hot liquid metallic hydrogen mixed with the molten core and carried
its contents to higher levels in the planetary interior. A core may now be
entirely absent, as gravitational measurements are not yet precise enough to
rule that possibility out entirely.

The uncertainty of the models is tied to the error margin in hitherto measured
parameters: one of the rotational coefficients (J6) used to describe the
planet's gravitational moment, Jupiter's equatorial radius, and its temperature
at 1 bar pressure. The Juno mission, which arrived in July 2016, is expected to
further constrain the values of these parameters for better models of the core.

The core region may be surrounded by dense metallic hydrogen, which extends
outward to about 78% of the radius of the planet. Rain-like droplets of helium
and neon precipitate downward through this layer, depleting the abundance of
these elements in the upper atmosphere.

Above the layer of metallic hydrogen lies a transparent interior atmosphere of
hydrogen. At this depth, the pressure and temperature are above hydrogen's
critical pressure of 1.2858 MPa and critical temperature of only 32.938 K. In
this state, there are no distinct liquid and gas phases—hydrogen is said to be
in a supercritical fluid state. It is convenient to treat hydrogen as gas in the
upper layer extending downward from the cloud layer to a depth of about
1,000 km, and as liquid in deeper layers. Physically, there is no clear
boundary—the gas smoothly becomes hotter and denser as one descends.

The temperature and pressure inside Jupiter increase steadily toward the core,
due to the Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism. At the pressure level of 10 bars, the
temperature is around 340 K (67 °C; 152 °F). At the phase transition region
where hydrogen—heated beyond its critical point—becomes metallic, it is
calculated the temperature is 10,000 K (9,700 °C; 17,500 °F) and the pressure is
200 GPa. The temperature at the core boundary is estimated to be 36,000 K
(35,700 °C; 64,300 °F) and the interior pressure is roughly 3,000–4,500 GPa.

Jupiter has the largest planetary atmosphere in the Solar System, spanning over
5,000 km (3,000 mi) in altitude. Because Jupiter has no surface, the base of its
atmosphere is usually considered to be the point at which atmospheric pressure
is equal to 100 kPa (1.0 bar).

Jupiter is perpetually covered with clouds composed of ammonia crystals and
possibly ammonium hydrosulfide. The clouds are located in the tropopause and are
arranged into bands of different latitudes, known as tropical regions. These are
sub-divided into lighter-hued zones and darker belts. The interactions of these
conflicting circulation patterns cause storms and turbulence. Wind speeds of
100 m/s (360 km/h) are common in zonal jets. The zones have been observed to
vary in width, color and intensity from year to year, but they have remained
sufficiently stable for scientists to give them identifying designations.

The cloud layer is only about 50 km (31 mi) deep, and consists of at least two
decks of clouds: a thick lower deck and a thin clearer region. There may also be
a thin layer of water clouds underlying the ammonia layer. Supporting the idea
of water clouds are the flashes of lightning detected in the atmosphere of
Jupiter. These electrical discharges can be up to a thousand times as powerful
as lightning on Earth. The water clouds are assumed to generate thunderstorms in
the same way as terrestrial thunderstorms, driven by the heat rising from the
interior.

The orange and brown coloration in the clouds of Jupiter are caused by upwelling
compounds that change color when they are exposed to ultraviolet light from the
Sun. The exact makeup remains uncertain, but the substances are thought to be
phosphorus, sulfur or possibly hydrocarbons. These colorful compounds, known as
chromophores, mix with the warmer, lower deck of clouds. The zones are formed
when rising convection cells form crystallizing ammonia that masks out these
lower clouds from view.

Jupiter's low axial tilt means that the poles constantly receive less solar
radiation than at the planet's equatorial region. Convection within the interior
of the planet transports more energy to the poles, balancing out the
temperatures at the cloud layer.

The best known feature of Jupiter is the Great Red Spot, a persistent
anticyclonic storm that is larger than Earth, located 22° south of the equator.
It is known to have been in existence since at least 1831, and possibly since
1665. Images by the Hubble Space Telescope have shown as many as two "red spots"
adjacent to the Great Red Spot. The storm is large enough to be visible through
Earth-based telescopes with an aperture of 12 cm or larger. Mathematical models
suggest that the storm is stable and may be a permanent feature of the planet.

The oval object rotates counterclockwise, with a period of about six days. The
Great Red Spot's dimensions are 24–40,000 km × 12–14,000 km. It is large enough
to contain two or three planets of Earth's diameter. The maximum altitude of
this storm is about 8 km (5 mi) above the surrounding cloudtops.

Storms such as this are common within the turbulent atmospheres of giant
planets. Jupiter also has white ovals and brown ovals, which are lesser unnamed
storms. White ovals tend to consist of relatively cool clouds within the upper
atmosphere. Brown ovals are warmer and located within the "normal cloud layer".
Such storms can last as little as a few hours or stretch on for centuries.

In 2000, an atmospheric feature formed in the southern hemisphere that is
similar in appearance to the Great Red Spot, but smaller. This was created when
several smaller, white oval-shaped storms merged to form a single feature—these
three smaller white ovals were first observed in 1938. The merged feature was
named Oval BA, and has been nicknamed Red Spot Junior. It has since increased in
intensity and changed color from white to red.

Jupiter's magnetic field is fourteen times as strong as that of Earth, ranging
from 4.2 gauss (0.42 mT) at the equator to 10–14 gauss (1.0–1.4 mT) at the
poles, making it the strongest in the Solar System (except for sunspots). This
field is thought to be generated by eddy currents—swirling movements of
conducting materials—within the liquid metallic hydrogen core. The volcanoes on
the moon Io emit large amounts of sulfur dioxide forming a gas torus along the
moon's orbit. The gas is ionized in the magnetosphere producing sulfur and
oxygen ions. They, together with hydrogen ions originating from the atmosphere
of Jupiter, form a plasma sheet in Jupiter's equatorial plane. The plasma in the
sheet co-rotates with the planet causing deformation of the dipole magnetic
field into that of magnetodisk. Electrons within the plasma sheet generate a
strong radio signature that produces bursts in the range of 0.6–30 MHz.

At about 75 Jupiter radii from the planet, the interaction of the magnetosphere
with the solar wind generates a bow shock. Surrounding Jupiter's magnetosphere
is a magnetopause, located at the inner edge of a magnetosheath—a region between
it and the bow shock. The solar wind interacts with these regions, elongating
the magnetosphere on Jupiter's lee side and extending it outward until it nearly
reaches the orbit of Saturn. The four largest moons of Jupiter all orbit within
the magnetosphere, which protects them from the solar wind.

The magnetosphere of Jupiter is responsible for intense episodes of radio
emission from the planet's polar regions. Volcanic activity on Jupiter's moon Io
(see below) injects gas into Jupiter's magnetosphere, producing a torus of
particles about the planet. As Io moves through this torus, the interaction
generates Alfvén waves that carry ionized matter into the polar regions of
Jupiter. As a result, radio waves are generated through a cyclotron maser
mechanism, and the energy is transmitted out along a cone-shaped surface. When
Earth intersects this cone, the radio emissions from Jupiter can exceed the
solar radio output.

Jupiter is the only planet whose barycenter with the Sun lies outside the volume
of the Sun, though by only 7% of the Sun's radius. The average distance between
Jupiter and the Sun is 778 million km (about 5.2 times the average distance
between Earth and the Sun, or 5.2 AU) and it completes an orbit every
11.86 years. This is two-fifths the orbital period of Saturn, forming a 5:2
orbital resonance between the two largest planets in the Solar System. The
elliptical orbit of Jupiter is inclined 1.31° compared to Earth. Because the
eccentricity of its orbit is 0.048, Jupiter's distance from the Sun varies by 75
million km between its nearest approach (perihelion) and furthest distance
(aphelion).

The axial tilt of Jupiter is relatively small: only 3.13°. As a result, it does
not experience significant seasonal changes, in contrast to, for example, Earth
and Mars.

Jupiter's rotation is the fastest of all the Solar System's planets, completing
a rotation on its axis in slightly less than ten hours; this creates an
equatorial bulge easily seen through an Earth-based amateur telescope. The
planet is shaped as an oblate spheroid, meaning that the diameter across its
equator is longer than the diameter measured between its poles. On Jupiter, the
equatorial diameter is 9,275 km (5,763 mi) longer than the diameter measured
through the poles.

Because Jupiter is not a solid body, its upper atmosphere undergoes differential
rotation. The rotation of Jupiter's polar atmosphere is about 5 minutes longer
than that of the equatorial atmosphere; three systems are used as frames of
reference, particularly when graphing the motion of atmospheric features. System
I applies from the latitudes 10° N to 10° S; its period is the planet's
shortest, at 9h 50m 30.0s. System II applies at all latitudes north and south of
these; its period is 9h 55m 40.6s. System III was first defined by radio
astronomers, and corresponds to the rotation of the planet's magnetosphere; its
period is Jupiter's official rotation.

Jupiter is usually the fourth brightest object in the sky (after the Sun, the
Moon and Venus); at times Mars appears brighter than Jupiter. Depending on
Jupiter's position with respect to the Earth, it can vary in visual magnitude
from as bright as −2.9 at opposition down to −1.6 during conjunction with the
Sun. The angular diameter of Jupiter likewise varies from 50.1 to 29.8 arc
seconds. Favorable oppositions occur when Jupiter is passing through perihelion,
an event that occurs once per orbit.

Earth overtakes Jupiter every 398.9 days as it orbits the Sun, a duration called
the synodic period. As it does so, Jupiter appears to undergo retrograde motion
with respect to the background stars. That is, for a period Jupiter seems to
move backward in the night sky, performing a looping motion.

Because the orbit of Jupiter is outside that of Earth, the phase angle of
Jupiter as viewed from Earth never exceeds 11.5°. That is, the planet always
appears nearly fully illuminated when viewed through Earth-based telescopes. It
was only during spacecraft missions to Jupiter that crescent views of the planet
were obtained. A small telescope will usually show Jupiter's four Galilean moons
and the prominent cloud belts across Jupiter's atmosphere. A large telescope
will show Jupiter's Great Red Spot when it faces Earth.

The observation of Jupiter dates back to at least the Babylonian astronomers of
the 7th or 8th century BC. The ancient Chinese also observed the orbit of
Suìxīng (歲星) and established their cycle of 12 earthly branches based on its
approximate number of years; the Chinese language still uses its name
(simplified as 岁) when referring to years of age. By the 4th century BC, these
observations had developed into the Chinese zodiac, with each year associated
with a Tai Sui star and god controlling the region of the heavens opposite
Jupiter's position in the night sky; these beliefs survive in some Taoist
religious practices and in the East Asian zodiac's twelve animals, now often
popularly assumed to be related to the arrival of the animals before Buddha. The
Chinese historian Xi Zezong has claimed that Gan De, an ancient Chinese
astronomer, discovered one of Jupiter's moons in 362 BC with the unaided eye. If
accurate, this would predate Galileo's discovery by nearly two millennia. In his
2nd century work the Almagest, the Hellenistic astronomer Claudius Ptolemaeus
constructed a geocentric planetary model based on deferents and epicycles to
explain Jupiter's motion relative to Earth, giving its orbital period around
Earth as 4332.38 days, or 11.86 years. In 499, Aryabhata, a
mathematician–astronomer from the classical age of Indian mathematics and
astronomy, also used a geocentric model to estimate Jupiter's period as
4332.2722 days, or 11.86 years.

In 1610, Galileo Galilei discovered the four largest moons of Jupiter (now known
as the Galilean moons) using a telescope; thought to be the first telescopic
observation of moons other than Earth's. One day after Galileo, Simon Marius
independently discovered moons around Jupiter, though he did not publish his
discovery in a book until 1614. It was Marius's names for the four major moons,
however, that stuck—Io, Europa, Ganymede and Callisto. These findings were also
the first discovery of celestial motion not apparently centered on Earth. The
discovery was a major point in favor of Copernicus' heliocentric theory of the
motions of the planets; Galileo's outspoken support of the Copernican theory
placed him under the threat of the Inquisition.

During the 1660s, Giovanni Cassini used a new telescope to discover spots and
colorful bands on Jupiter and observed that the planet appeared oblate; that is,
flattened at the poles. He was also able to estimate the rotation period of the
planet. In 1690 Cassini noticed that the atmosphere undergoes differential
rotation.

The Great Red Spot, a prominent oval-shaped feature in the southern hemisphere
of Jupiter, may have been observed as early as 1664 by Robert Hooke and in 1665
by Cassini, although this is disputed. The pharmacist Heinrich Schwabe produced
the earliest known drawing to show details of the Great Red Spot in 1831.

The Red Spot was reportedly lost from sight on several occasions between 1665
and 1708 before becoming quite conspicuous in 1878. It was recorded as fading
again in 1883 and at the start of the 20th century.

Both Giovanni Borelli and Cassini made careful tables of the motions of
Jupiter's moons, allowing predictions of the times when the moons would pass
before or behind the planet. By the 1670s, it was observed that when Jupiter was
on the opposite side of the Sun from Earth, these events would occur about
17 minutes later than expected. Ole Rømer deduced that sight is not
instantaneous (a conclusion that Cassini had earlier rejected), and this timing
discrepancy was used to estimate the speed of light.

In 1892, E. E. Barnard observed a fifth satellite of Jupiter with the 36-inch
(910 mm) refractor at Lick Observatory in California. The discovery of this
relatively small object, a testament to his keen eyesight, quickly made him
famous. This moon was later named Amalthea. It was the last planetary moon to be
discovered directly by visual observation.

In 1932, Rupert Wildt identified absorption bands of ammonia and methane in the
spectra of Jupiter.

Three long-lived anticyclonic features termed white ovals were observed in 1938.
For several decades they remained as separate features in the atmosphere,
sometimes approaching each other but never merging. Finally, two of the ovals
merged in 1998, then absorbed the third in 2000, becoming Oval BA.

In 1955, Bernard Burke and Kenneth Franklin detected bursts of radio signals
coming from Jupiter at 22.2 MHz. The period of these bursts matched the rotation
of the planet, and they were also able to use this information to refine the
rotation rate. Radio bursts from Jupiter were found to come in two forms: long
bursts (or L-bursts) lasting up to several seconds, and short bursts (or
S-bursts) that had a duration of less than a hundredth of a second.

Since 1973 a number of automated spacecraft have visited Jupiter, most notably
the Pioneer 10 space probe, the first spacecraft to get close enough to Jupiter
to send back revelations about the properties and phenomena of the Solar
System's largest planet. Flights to other planets within the Solar System are
accomplished at a cost in energy, which is described by the net change in
velocity of the spacecraft, or delta-v. Entering a Hohmann transfer orbit from
Earth to Jupiter from low Earth orbit requires a delta-v of 6.3 km/s which is
comparable to the 9.7 km/s delta-v needed to reach low Earth orbit. Fortunately,
gravity assists through planetary flybys can be used to reduce the energy
required to reach Jupiter, albeit at the cost of a significantly longer flight
duration.

Beginning in 1973, several spacecraft have performed planetary flyby maneuvers
that brought them within observation range of Jupiter. The Pioneer missions
obtained the first close-up images of Jupiter's atmosphere and several of its
moons. They discovered that the radiation fields near the planet were much
stronger than expected, but both spacecraft managed to survive in that
environment. The trajectories of these spacecraft were used to refine the mass
estimates of the Jovian system. Radio occultations by the planet resulted in
better measurements of Jupiter's diameter and the amount of polar flattening.

Six years later, the Voyager missions vastly improved the understanding of the
Galilean moons and discovered Jupiter's rings. They also confirmed that the
Great Red Spot was anticyclonic. Comparison of images showed that the Red Spot
had changed hue since the Pioneer missions, turning from orange to dark brown. A
torus of ionized atoms was discovered along Io's orbital path, and volcanoes
were found on the moon's surface, some in the process of erupting. As the
spacecraft passed behind the planet, it observed flashes of lightning in the
night side atmosphere.

The next mission to encounter Jupiter was the Ulysses solar probe. It performed
a flyby maneuver to attain a polar orbit around the Sun. During this pass, the
spacecraft conducted studies on Jupiter's magnetosphere. Ulysses has no cameras
so no images were taken. A second flyby six years later was at a much greater
distance.

In 2000, the Cassini probe flew by Jupiter en route to Saturn, and provided some
of the highest-resolution images ever made of the planet.

The New Horizons probe flew by Jupiter for gravity assist en route to Pluto. Its
closest approach was on February 28, 2007. The probe's cameras measured plasma
output from volcanoes on Io and studied all four Galilean moons in detail, as
well as making long-distance observations of the outer moons Himalia and Elara.
Imaging of the Jovian system began September 4, 2006.

The first spacecraft to orbit Jupiter was the Galileo probe, which entered orbit
on December 7, 1995. It orbited the planet for over seven years, conducting
multiple flybys of all the Galilean moons and Amalthea. The spacecraft also
witnessed the impact of Comet Shoemaker–Levy 9 as it approached Jupiter in 1994,
giving a unique vantage point for the event. Its originally designed capacity
was limited by the failed deployment of its high-gain radio antenna, although
extensive information was still gained about the Jovian system from Galileo.

A 340-kilogram titanium atmospheric probe was released from the spacecraft in
July 1995, entering Jupiter's atmosphere on December 7. It parachuted through
150 km (93 mi) of the atmosphere at a speed of about 2,575 km/h (1600 mph) and
collected data for 57.6 minutes before it was crushed by the pressure of about
23 atmospheres at a temperature of 153 °C. It melted thereafter, and possibly
vaporized. The Galileo orbiter itself experienced a more rapid version of the
same fate when it was deliberately steered into the planet on September 21, 2003
at a speed of over 50 km/s to avoid any possibility of it crashing into and
possibly contaminating Europa, a moon which has been hypothesized to have the
possibility of harboring life.

Data from this mission revealed that hydrogen composes up to 90% of Jupiter's
atmosphere. The recorded temperature was more than 300 °C (>570 °F) and the
windspeed measured more than 644 km/h (>400 mph) before the probes vapourised.

NASA's Juno mission arrived at Jupiter on July 4, 2016, and is expected to
complete 37 orbits over the next 20 months. The mission plan called for Juno to
study the planet in detail from a polar orbit. On August 27, 2016, the
spacecraft completed its first fly-by of Jupiter and sent back the first-ever
images of Jupiter’s north pole.

The next planned mission to the Jovian system will be the European Space
Agency's Jupiter Icy Moon Explorer (JUICE), due to launch in 2022, followed by
NASA's Europa Clipper mission in 2025.

There has been great interest in studying the icy moons in detail because of the
possibility of subsurface liquid oceans on Jupiter's moons Europa, Ganymede, and
Callisto. Funding difficulties have delayed progress. NASA's JIMO (Jupiter Icy
Moons Orbiter) was cancelled in 2005. A subsequent proposal was developed for a
joint NASA/ESA mission called EJSM/Laplace, with a provisional launch date
around 2020. EJSM/Laplace would have consisted of the NASA-led Jupiter Europa
Orbiter and the ESA-led Jupiter Ganymede Orbiter. However, ESA had formally
ended the partnership by April 2011, citing budget issues at NASA and the
consequences on the mission timetable. Instead, ESA planned to go ahead with a
European-only mission to compete in its L1 Cosmic Vision selection.

Jupiter has 67 natural satellites. Of these, 51 are less than 10 kilometres in
diameter and have only been discovered since 1975. The four largest moons,
visible from Earth with binoculars on a clear night, known as the "Galilean
moons", are Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto.

The moons discovered by Galileo—Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto—are among the
largest satellites in the Solar System. The orbits of three of them (Io, Europa,
and Ganymede) form a pattern known as a Laplace resonance; for every four orbits
that Io makes around Jupiter, Europa makes exactly two orbits and Ganymede makes
exactly one. This resonance causes the gravitational effects of the three large
moons to distort their orbits into elliptical shapes, because each moon receives
an extra tug from its neighbors at the same point in every orbit it makes. The
tidal force from Jupiter, on the other hand, works to circularize their orbits.

The eccentricity of their orbits causes regular flexing of the three moons'
shapes, with Jupiter's gravity stretching them out as they approach it and
allowing them to spring back to more spherical shapes as they swing away. This
tidal flexing heats the moons' interiors by friction. This is seen most
dramatically in the extraordinary volcanic activity of innermost Io (which is
subject to the strongest tidal forces), and to a lesser degree in the geological
youth of Europa's surface (indicating recent resurfacing of the moon's
exterior).

Before the discoveries of the Voyager missions, Jupiter's moons were arranged
neatly into four groups of four, based on commonality of their orbital elements.
Since then, the large number of new small outer moons has complicated this
picture. There are now thought to be six main groups, although some are more
distinct than others.

A basic sub-division is a grouping of the eight inner regular moons, which have
nearly circular orbits near the plane of Jupiter's equator and are thought to
have formed with Jupiter. The remainder of the moons consist of an unknown
number of small irregular moons with elliptical and inclined orbits, which are
thought to be captured asteroids or fragments of captured asteroids. Irregular
moons that belong to a group share similar orbital elements and thus may have a
common origin, perhaps as a larger moon or captured body that broke up.

Jupiter has a faint planetary ring system composed of three main segments: an
inner torus of particles known as the halo, a relatively bright main ring, and
an outer gossamer ring. These rings appear to be made of dust, rather than ice
as with Saturn's rings. The main ring is probably made of material ejected from
the satellites Adrastea and Metis. Material that would normally fall back to the
moon is pulled into Jupiter because of its strong gravitational influence. The
orbit of the material veers towards Jupiter and new material is added by
additional impacts. In a similar way, the moons Thebe and Amalthea probably
produce the two distinct components of the dusty gossamer ring. There is also
evidence of a rocky ring strung along Amalthea's orbit which may consist of
collisional debris from that moon.

Along with the Sun, the gravitational influence of Jupiter has helped shape the
Solar System. The orbits of most of the system's planets lie closer to Jupiter's
orbital plane than the Sun's equatorial plane (Mercury is the only planet that
is closer to the Sun's equator in orbital tilt), the Kirkwood gaps in the
asteroid belt are mostly caused by Jupiter, and the planet may have been
responsible for the Late Heavy Bombardment of the inner Solar System's history.

Along with its moons, Jupiter's gravitational field controls numerous asteroids
that have settled into the regions of the Lagrangian points preceding and
following Jupiter in its orbit around the Sun. These are known as the Trojan
asteroids, and are divided into Greek and Trojan "camps" to commemorate the
Iliad. The first of these, 588 Achilles, was discovered by Max Wolf in 1906;
since then more than two thousand have been discovered. The largest is 624
Hektor.

Most short-period comets belong to the Jupiter family—defined as comets with
semi-major axes smaller than Jupiter's. Jupiter family comets are thought to
form in the Kuiper belt outside the orbit of Neptune. During close encounters
with Jupiter their orbits are perturbed into a smaller period and then
circularized by regular gravitational interaction with the Sun and Jupiter.

Due to the magnitude of Jupiter's mass, the center of gravity between it and the
Sun lies just above the Sun's surface. Jupiter is the only body in the Solar
System for which this is true.

Jupiter has been called the Solar System's vacuum cleaner, because of its
immense gravity well and location near the inner Solar System. It receives the
most frequent comet impacts of the Solar System's planets. It was thought that
the planet served to partially shield the inner system from cometary
bombardment. However, recent computer simulations suggest that Jupiter does not
cause a net decrease in the number of comets that pass through the inner Solar
System, as its gravity perturbs their orbits inward roughly as often as it
accretes or ejects them. This topic remains controversial among scientists, as
some think it draws comets towards Earth from the Kuiper belt while others think
that Jupiter protects Earth from the alleged Oort cloud. Jupiter experiences
about 200 times more asteroid and comet impacts than Earth.

A 1997 survey of early astronomical records and drawings suggested that a
certain dark surface feature discovered by astronomer Giovanni Cassini in 1690
may have been an impact scar. The survey initially produced eight more candidate
sites as potential impact observations that he and others had recorded between
1664 and 1839. It was later determined, however, that these candidate sites had
little or no possibility of being the results of the proposed impacts.

The planet Jupiter has been known since ancient times. It is visible to the
naked eye in the night sky and can occasionally be seen in the daytime when the
Sun is low. To the Babylonians, this object represented their god Marduk. They
used Jupiter's roughly 12-year orbit along the ecliptic to define the
constellations of their zodiac.

The Romans named it after Jupiter (Latin: Iuppiter, Iūpiter) (also called Jove),
the principal god of Roman mythology, whose name comes from the
Proto-Indo-European vocative compound *Dyēu-pəter (nominative: *Dyēus-pətēr,
meaning "Father Sky-God", or "Father Day-God"). In turn, Jupiter was the
counterpart to the mythical Greek Zeus (Ζεύς), also referred to as Dias (Δίας),
the planetary name of which is retained in modern Greek.

The astronomical symbol for the planet, , is a stylized representation of the
god's lightning bolt. The original Greek deity Zeus supplies the root zeno-,
used to form some Jupiter-related words, such as zenographic.

Jovian is the adjectival form of Jupiter. The older adjectival form jovial,
employed by astrologers in the Middle Ages, has come to mean "happy" or "merry",
moods ascribed to Jupiter's astrological influence.

The Chinese, Koreans and Japanese called it the "wood star" (Chinese: 木星;
pinyin: mùxīng), based on the Chinese Five Elements. Chinese Taoism personified
it as the Fu star. The Greeks called it Φαέθων, Phaethon, "blazing". In Vedic
astrology, Hindu astrologers named the planet after Brihaspati, the religious
teacher of the gods, and often called it "Guru", which literally means the
"Heavy One".

In Germanic mythology, Jupiter is equated to Thor, whence the English name
Thursday for the Roman dies Jovis.

In the Central Asian-Turkic myths, Jupiter is called Erendiz or Erentüz, from
eren (of uncertain meaning) and yultuz ("star"). There are many theories about
the meaning of eren. These peoples calculated the period of the orbit of Jupiter
as 11 years and 300 days. They believed that some social and natural events
connected to Erentüz's movements on the sky.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emilia_Clarke

Emilia Isabelle Euphemia Rose Clarke (born 23 October 1986) is an English
actress. She first gained notice for her role as Daenerys Targaryen in the HBO
series Game of Thrones, for which she received three Emmy Award nominations for
Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series in 2013, 2015 and 2016. In
2017, Clarke became one of the highest paid actors on television and earned
US$1.1 million per episode of Game of Thrones. Clarke made her Broadway debut in
a production of Breakfast at Tiffany's as Holly Golightly in March 2013. In
2015, she was named Esquire's Sexiest Woman Alive.

She has starred in such films as the science fiction film Terminator Genisys
(2015) as Sarah Connor and as Louisa Clark in the romance film Me Before You
(2016).

Clarke was born in London, and grew up in Berkshire. Her father is a theatre
sound engineer. She has a younger brother. Clarke's interest in acting began at
the age of three after seeing the musical Show Boat on which her father was
working. She was educated at Rye St Antony School and at St Edward's School,
Oxford (graduated 2005). She attended Drama Centre London, and graduated in
2009.

Clarke's early work includes two plays at St. Edwards, ten plays at Drama Centre
London, the 2009 Company of Angels production of Sense, and two 2009 commercials
for Samaritans. One of her first film roles was for a University of London
students' short film. Her first television roles were Saskia Mayer in a 2009
episode of the British soap opera Doctors and Savannah in Syfy's 2010 film
Triassic Attack. Screen International magazine named her as one of the "UK Stars
of Tomorrow".

In 2010 Clarke was cast as Daenerys Targaryen in the HBO medieval fantasy series
Game of Thrones, based on the book series A Song of Ice and Fire by George R. R.
Martin. She was cast after fellow British actress Tamzin Merchant was replaced
for undisclosed reasons. In an interview, Clarke stated that she did the funky
chicken and robot dance during her audition.

The show debuted in April 2011 to positive reviews and was quickly picked up by
the network for a second season. She has appeared in all six broadcast seasons,
and is attached to the seventh. Clarke won the 2011 EWwy Award for Best
Supporting Actress in a Drama for her role as Daenerys. In 2013, Clarke was
nominated for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series at the 65th
Primetime Emmy Awards. She was nominated again in the category in 2015 and 2016.
She was voted the most desirable woman in the world by Askmen readers in 2014.

In 2012, Clarke appeared in Spike Island, a film named after the location of The
Stone Roses's seminal 1990 gig. From March to April 2013, Clarke played Holly
Golightly in a Broadway production of Breakfast at Tiffany's. That year, she
also starred in Dom Hemingway alongside Jude Law.

In May 2014, it was announced that she had joined the feature film Garden of
Last Days alongside James Franco, but the movie was scrapped two weeks before
production was due to begin. Clarke was offered the role of Anastasia Steele in
Fifty Shades of Grey but turned down the part because of the nudity required.
She played Sarah Connor in Terminator Genisys (2015), opposite Arnold
Schwarzenegger, Jai Courtney, and Jason Clarke. The film grossed over $400
million, but received mixed reviews from critics.

In 2016, Clarke starred as the female lead, opposite Sam Claflin, in the movie
adaption of the best selling book (of the same name), Me Before You, released on
3 June 2016. The film was a commercial success, grossing over $200 million
worldwide.

She will play the lead as Nurse Verena, in Voice from the Stone which be
released on April 2017 in limited release, video on demand and digital HD. She
was named Esquire's Sexiest Woman Alive in 2015. She is also set to be attached
to the films The Guns of August opposite Helena Bonham Carter, Set It Up
opposite Glen Powell, and Above Suspicion opposite Jack Huston. In November
2016, Clarke was cast as the female lead in the Star Wars untitled Han Solo
film. In January 2017, Clarke was cast as the lead in the film adaption of The
Beauty Inside.

In 2012, she dated Seth MacFarlane. The two broke up after approximately six
months but remain friends. As of October 2015, Clarke resides in Hampstead,
London. In 2016, she purchased a house in Venice Beach, Los Angeles.

Clarke has been nominated three times for a Primetime Emmy Awards: Outstanding
Supporting Actress in a Drama Series for Game of Thrones.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexander_Skarsg%C3%A5rd

Alexander Johan Hjalmar Skarsgård (Swedish pronunciation: [ˈskɑːʂɡoːɖ]; born
August 25, 1976) is a Swedish actor. He is best known for his roles as vampire
Eric Northman on the HBO series True Blood, Meekus in Zoolander and Brad Colbert
in the HBO miniseries Generation Kill. He is the son of Swedish actor Stellan
Skarsgård.

In 2016, Skarsgård appeared in War on Everyone and as Tarzan in The Legend of
Tarzan.

Alexander Skarsgård was born in Stockholm, Sweden. He is the eldest son of actor
Stellan Skarsgård and his first wife, My Agnes, a physician. He has five younger
siblings: Gustaf, Sam, Bill, Eija and Valter, and two half-brothers, Ossian and
Kolbjörn. Gustaf, Bill, Sam, and Valter are also actors.

A friend of his father, who was a director, gave Skarsgård his first film role
when he was seven years old. He played Kalle Nubb in Åke och hans värld (Åke and
His World). In 1989, the lead role in the Swedish television production Hunden
som log (The Dog That Smiled) made him famous in Sweden at the age of thirteen.
Uncomfortable with being recognized, he quit acting for the next seven years.

At age 19, he applied to do his national service. He served in the Swedish
military for 18 months, in a unit that dealt with anti-sabotage and
anti-terrorism in the Stockholm archipelago. After completing his service in
1996 he left Sweden and attended Leeds Beckett University in England for six
months. He enrolled to study English but admits he did not study much and "had a
blast" instead.

After seven years away from acting, he started to consider it again. In 1997, he
enrolled in a theater course at Marymount Manhattan College and moved to New
York City. He returned to Stockholm after six months, but the time he spent
studying theater showed him that he wanted to act.

Upon his return to Sweden, Skarsgård began picking up acting jobs, working in
film, television and theatrical productions. While on vacation in the United
States, he auditioned for and landed the role of Meekus in the 2001 film
Zoolander. In 2003, his work in Hundtricket-the Movie (The Dog Trick) earned him
an Guldbagge Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor. He was named the
Sexiest Man in Sweden five times.

He moved to Los Angeles in 2004 but continued to work in Sweden. His break came
when he was cast as Sergeant Brad "Iceman" Colbert in the critically acclaimed
HBO miniseries Generation Kill. An adaptation of journalist Evan Wright's book
of the same name, Generation Kill follows the 1st Reconnaissance Battalion of
the United States Marine Corps during the early part of the Iraq War. The part
of Brad Colbert was the closest to a "lead" in Generation Kill, and director
Susanna White and executive producer David Simon at first disagreed about
casting Skarsgård. White wanted to cast him but Simon was not convinced he could
pull off the American accent. After four auditions in three cities, Skarsgård
learned the part was his just 36 hours before he had to board a plane for
Namibia where the project was filming. The cast and crew filmed for seven months
in the desert, shooting six days a week. Skarsgård worked with a dialect coach
to master the American accent.

Just before leaving to shoot Generation Kill, Skarsgård heard about True Blood,
a new series HBO was developing based on the Southern Vampire Mysteries series
of novels by Charlaine Harris. At first he was unsure about playing a vampire,
but when he learned that Alan Ball, creator of the HBO series Six Feet Under and
Academy Award winning screenwriter of American Beauty, was behind the project,
he sent in an audition tape. The audition was for the role of Bill Compton,
which eventually went to Stephen Moyer. Skarsgård was later cast as Eric
Northman, a 1000-year-old, Viking vampire sheriff, local bar owner and potential
love interest of heroine Sookie Stackhouse. True Blood launched its seventh and
final season in June 2014.

In 2009, Skarsgård appeared in the music video for pop singer Lady Gaga's
"Paparazzi". He was the voice of Stefan in the 2009 animated film Metropia,
directed by Tarik Saleh. In 2010, Skarsgård portrayed Terje, a gay Norwegian
trekking to the North Pole, in the British mockumentary Beyond the Pole.

Suit maker Hickey Freeman chose Skarsgård to model a new look it debuted in
2010. Annie Leibovitz photographed the ad campaign which appeared in The Wall
Street Journal Magazine, GQ and Details. He covered the September 2010 issue of
Rolling Stone with his True Blood co-stars, Anna Paquin and Stephen Moyer.

Skarsgård appeared in two 2011 films. Melancholia, an apocalyptic movie directed
by Lars von Trier and starring Kirsten Dunst, Charlotte Gainsbourg and Kiefer
Sutherland, premiered at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival. Skarsgård appeared in
Straw Dogs, a remake of the 1971 film of the same name, as Charlie Venner. The
remake's director, Rod Lurie, transferred the small town setting from Cornwall
to Mississippi, and described Venner as "an ex-football star gone to seed". The
film co-starred James Marsden and Kate Bosworth and was released September 16,
2011.

In 2012, Skarsgård appeared alongside Taylor Kitsch and Rihanna in Peter Berg's
Battleship, an adaptation of the Hasbro game. He also starred with Julianne
Moore and Steve Coogan in Scott McGehee and David Siegel’s film, What Maisie
Knew, an adaptation of the Henry James novel of the same name. He was also part
of the ensemble cast in Henry Alex Rubin's thriller, Disconnect, playing
opposite Paula Patton.

Skarsgård starred alongside Brit Marling and Ellen Page in Zal Batmanglij's 2013
film, The East. Skarsgård starred in the 2016 film The Legend of Tarzan,
portraying the title character, opposite Margot Robbie as Jane.

He has been in a relationship with British model and fashion journalist Alexa
Chung since 2015.

Skarsgård is a fan of Swedish football and supports Hammarby IF, a club based in
Stockholm, his birth city. In October 2010, he participated in "Bajen Aid" by
donating several items he had autographed and auctioning them off to raise money
for the Hammarby football club. In July 2011, Skarsgård received an honorary
degree from Leeds Metropolitan University where he was formerly a student.

Skarsgård was the US Ambassador for the American team for a Walking With The
Wounded fundraising event for wounded soldiers. He trekked to the South Pole
against Team UK (Prince Harry, Ambassador) and Team Canada/Australia (The Wire
actor Dominic West, Ambassador). A few days into the trek, it was decided that
the competition part of the race would be cancelled due to hazardous terrain and
weather conditions, so the teams combined forces and continued. Alongside Prince
Harry, West and several wounded soldiers, he successfully made it to the South
Pole on December 13, 2013.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Margot_Robbie

Margot Elise Robbie (/ˈmɑːrɡoʊ ˈrɒbi/; born 2 July 1990) is an Australian
actress. Robbie started her career by appearing in Australian independent films
in the late 2000s. She was later cast in the soap opera Neighbours (2008–2011),
which earned her two Logie Award nominations.

After moving to the United States, Robbie starred in the short-lived ABC drama
series Pan Am (2011–2012). In 2013, she made her big screen debut in Richard
Curtis's romantic comedy-drama film About Time and co-starred in Martin
Scorsese's biographical black comedy The Wolf of Wall Street. In 2015, Robbie
co-starred in the romantic comedy-drama film Focus, appeared in the romantic
World War II drama film Suite Française and starred in the science fiction film
Z for Zachariah. That same year, she played herself in The Big Short. In 2016,
she portrayed Jane Porter in the action-adventure film The Legend of Tarzan and
Harley Quinn in the superhero film Suicide Squad.

Robbie was born in Dalby, Queensland, Australia, later moving to the Gold Coast.
Her parents are Sarie Kessler, a physiotherapist, and Doug Robbie, a former
farm-owner. She has three siblings, older brother Lachlan or "Lockie", younger
brother Cameron and a sister, Anya. Robbie and her siblings were raised by their
single mother. She has minimal contact with her father. She grew up in a farming
family. To make ends meet, Robbie worked three jobs simultaneously at the age of
16. She studied drama at school, graduating from Somerset College. When Robbie
was 17 years old, she moved to Melbourne to begin acting professionally.

Robbie has been acting professionally since 2007, when she starred in two
feature films, I.C.U. and Vigilante. After impressing the director with her
performance during an audition, she won the lead in I.C.U. without an agent at
the time. Robbie also acted in commercials and had guest roles in The Elephant
Princess and City Homicide as Caitlin Brentford.

Robbie began appearing as Donna Freedman on Neighbours from June 2008. The
character was originally only a guest role, but she was soon promoted to a
regular cast member. In an interview with Digital Spy, Robbie said she had gone
on a snowboarding holiday to Canada with her boyfriend soon after auditioning,
but had to return after only two days when told that she had won the role.

In early 2009, Robbie appeared in various Network Ten promotions, featuring an
ensemble of popular Australian faces on the network. In July 2009, she filled
the "Generation Y" guest spot on the Network Ten show Talkin' 'Bout Your
Generation. Robbie also became a Youth Ambassador for missing persons as part of
National Youth Week.

In the same year, Robbie was nominated for Most Popular New Female Talent at the
Australian Logie Awards. She was also nominated for Favorite Hottie at the
Nickelodeon Kids Choice Awards and was up against her Neighbours co-star Dean
Geyer. In September 2010, Robbie announced that she was to leave Neighbours
after almost three years to pursue an acting career in Hollywood. Her final
scenes aired on 26 January 2011 and in April of that year, Robbie was nominated
for Most Popular Actress at the Logie Awards.

After arriving in Los Angeles for pilot season, Robbie auditioned for the new
series of Charlie's Angels. However, the producers at Sony Pictures Television
preferred her for a role in ABC drama series Pan Am alongside Christina Ricci.
Robbie landed the role of Laura Cameron, a newly trained flight attendant. Pan
Am was cancelled after one season due to falling ratings, despite receiving
positive reviews from critics.

In May 2012, Robbie joined the cast of Richard Curtis' romantic comedy About
Time (2013) alongside Domhnall Gleeson, Rachel McAdams and Bill Nighy. About
Time was released in the United Kingdom on 4 September 2013 and in the United
States on 1 November 2013. The film received positive reviews and grossed $87
million on its $12 million budget.

In June 2012, it was announced that Robbie was in talks to appear in Martin
Scorsese's The Wolf of Wall Street (2013) with Leonardo DiCaprio and Jonah Hill.
Her casting was confirmed in August. The Wolf of Wall Street was released on 25
December 2013 to positive reviews and became a commercial success with a
worldwide gross of $392 million making it Scorsese's highest-grossing film. The
film was subsequently nominated for five Academy Awards, including Best Picture.
For her performance as Jordan Belfort's second wife Naomi Lapaglia, Robbie was
praised by critics for her Brooklyn accent. Critic Sasha Stone wrote "She's
Scorsese's best blonde bombshell discovery since Cathy Moriarty in Raging Bull.
Robbie is funny, hard and kills every scene she's in". She received a nomination
for the MTV Movie Award for Best Breakthrough Performance and won the Empire
Award for Best Newcomer.

In 2015, Robbie starred opposite Will Smith in romantic comedy-drama film Focus.
In the film, she plays an inexperienced grifter learning the craft from Smith's
character. The film was released on 27 February 2015 to generally mixed reviews.
However, Robbie's performance was praised. Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wrote
"Robbie is a wow and then some. The Aussie actress who made us sit up and take
notice as Leonardo DiCaprio's wife in The Wolf of Wall Street shows a comic
flair backed up with beauty and steel. Even when Focus fumbles, Robbie deals a
winning hand." Focus grossed over $150 million worldwide. In 2015, Robbie
received a nomination for the BAFTA Rising Star Award. Also in 2015, Robbie
played the leading role of Ann Burden in the film adaptation of Z for Zachariah
with Chris Pine and Chiwetel Ejiofor, which was shot in New Zealand. The film
premiered on 24 January 2015 at the Sundance Film Festival and had its
theatrical release on 28 August 2015. The film received positive reviews.
Robbie's performance was praised by critics. Drew McWeeny of HitFix wrote
"Robbie's work here establishes her as one of the very best actresses in her age
range today".

Robbie appeared in a documentary special celebrating Neighbours' 30th
anniversary titled Neighbours 30th: The Stars Reunite, which aired in Australia
and the UK in March 2015. She also appeared in Suite Française (2015) alongside
Michelle Williams, Kristin Scott Thomas and Matthias Schoenaerts, an adaptation
of Irène Némirovsky's novel. The film received positive reviews. Robbie made a
cameo appearance in Adam McKay's comedy-drama The Big Short, released on 11
December 2015.

Robbie co-starred with Tina Fey in Whiskey Tango Foxtrot, a film adaptation of
The Taliban Shuffle. She plays Tanya Vanderpoel, a British TV journalist. The
film also stars Martin Freeman and Alfred Molina and was released on 4 March
2016 by Paramount Pictures. In May 2016, Calvin Klein announced Robbie would be
the face of their newest women's fragrance Deep Euphoria. Later that year,
Robbie starred as Jane Porter in David Yates's The Legend of Tarzan, opposite
Alexander Skarsgård, Samuel L. Jackson and Christoph Waltz. The film was
released on 1 July.

Robbie's third 2016 role was Harley Quinn in Warner Bros.' DC Comics
supervillain film Suicide Squad, as part of an ensemble cast that includes Will
Smith, Jared Leto, Viola Davis and Joel Kinnaman. Principal photography
commenced on 13 April 2015, and the film was released on 5 August 2016. Robbie
hosted the 42nd season premiere of Saturday Night Live on 1 October 2016, with
musical guest The Weeknd. In 2017, Robbie began promoting Nissan electric
vehicles. She was scheduled to voice a character in the 2018 DreamWorks
Animation Larrikins, before the project was cancelled in March 2017.

Robbie has been confirmed to star in the film adaptation of Marisa Lankester's
memoir Dangerous Odds and Matthew Michael Carnahan's Violent Talent. In February
2016, Robbie was cast in Vaughn Stein's thriller film Terminal as Annie. She
will also portray American figure skater Tonya Harding in I, Tonya, written by
Steven Rogers and directed by Craig Gillespie. Robbie will reprise her role as
Harley Quinn in Gotham City Sirens that she will also produce. She will star
alongside Domhnall Gleeson in an untitled film as A. A. Milne's wife Daphne de
Sélincourt. In July 2016, Robbie was confirmed to star in an adaptation of Matt
Ruff's thriller novel Bad Monkeys as Jane Charlotte. She will also produce the
film for LuckyChap Entertainment. Robbie will voice a character in the
animated/live-action Peter Rabbit film adaptation. In 2017, she was cast as Maid
Marian in Marian. Robbie will also co-produce the film for LuckyChap
Entertainment.

Robbie lived in New York City for several years. Since 2014, Robbie has been in
a relationship with British assistant director Tom Ackerley, whom she met on the
set of Suite Française. In December 2016, Robbie and Ackerley married in a
private ceremony in Byron Bay. As of May 2014, she lives in London with Ackerley
and two friends.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lionel_Messi

Lionel Andrés "Leo" Messi (Spanish pronunciation: [ljoˈnel anˈdɾes ˈmesi] (
listen); born 24 June 1987) is an Argentine professional footballer who plays as
a forward for Spanish club FC Barcelona and the Argentina national team. Often
considered the best player in the world and rated by many in the sport as the
greatest of all time, Messi is the only player in history to win five FIFA
Ballon d'Or awards, four of which he won consecutively, and the first to win
three European Golden Shoes.[note 2] With Barcelona he has won eight La Liga
titles, four UEFA Champions League titles, and four Copas del Rey, among other
trophies. Both a prolific goalscorer and a creative playmaker, Messi holds the
records for most goals scored in La Liga, a La Liga season (50), and a club
football season in Europe (73), as well as those for most assists made in La
Liga and the Copa América. He has scored over 500 senior career goals for club
and country.

Born and raised in central Argentina, Messi was diagnosed with a growth hormone
deficiency as a child. At age 13, he relocated to Spain to join Barcelona, who
agreed to pay for his medical treatment. After a fast progression through
Barcelona's youth academy, Messi made his competitive debut aged 17 in October
2004. Despite being injury-prone during his early career, he established himself
as an integral player for the club within the next three years, finishing 2007
as a finalist for both the Ballon d'Or and FIFA World Player of the Year award,
a feat he repeated the following year. His first uninterrupted campaign came in
the 2008–09 season, during which he helped Barcelona achieve the first treble in
Spanish football. At 22 years old, Messi won the Ballon d'Or and FIFA World
Player of the Year award by record voting margins.

Three successful seasons followed, with Messi winning three consecutive FIFA
Ballons d'Or, including an unprecedented fourth. His personal best campaign to
date was the 2011–12 season, in which he set the La Liga and European records
for most goals scored in a single season, while establishing himself as
Barcelona's all-time top scorer in official competitions in March 2012. He again
struggled with injury during the following two seasons, twice finishing second
for the Ballon d'Or behind Cristiano Ronaldo, his perceived career rival. Messi
regained his best form during the 2014–15 campaign, breaking the all-time
goalscoring records in both La Liga and the Champions League in November
2014,[note 3] and led Barcelona to a historic second treble.

An Argentine international, Messi is his country's all-time leading goalscorer.
At youth level, he won the 2005 FIFA World Youth Championship, finishing the
tournament with both the Golden Ball and Golden Shoe, and an Olympic gold medal
at the 2008 Summer Olympics. His style of play as a diminutive, left-footed
dribbler drew comparisons with compatriot Diego Maradona, who declared the
teenager his successor. After making his senior debut in August 2005, Messi
became the youngest Argentine to play and score in a FIFA World Cup during the
2006 edition, and reached the final of the 2007 Copa América, where he was named
young player of the tournament. As the squad's captain from August 2011, he led
Argentina to three consecutive finals: the 2014 World Cup, for which he won the
Golden Ball, and the 2015 and 2016 Copas América.

Lionel Andrés Messi was born on 24 June 1987 in Rosario, Santa Fe, the third of
four children of Jorge Messi, a steel factory manager, and his wife Celia
Cuccittini, who worked in a magnet manufacturing workshop. On his father's side,
he is of Italian and Spanish heritage, the great-grandson of immigrants from
Marche and Catalonia, and on his mother's side, he is of primarily Italian
descent. Growing up in a tight-knit, football-loving family, "Leo" developed a
passion for the sport from an early age, playing constantly with his older
brothers, Rodrigo and Matías, and his cousins, Maximiliano and Emanuel
Biancucchi, both of whom became professional footballers. At the age of four
years, he joined local club Grandoli, where he was coached by his father, though
his earliest influence as a player came from his maternal grandmother, Celia,
who accompanied him to training and matches. He was greatly affected by her
death, shortly before his eleventh birthday; since then, as a devout Catholic,
he has celebrated his goals by looking up and pointing to the sky in tribute of
his grandmother.

A lifelong supporter of Newell's Old Boys, Messi joined the Rosario club when he
was six years old. During the six years he played for Newell's, he scored almost
500 goals as a member of "The Machine of '87", the near-unbeatable youth side
named for the year of their birth, and regularly entertained crowds by
performing ball tricks during half-time of the first team's home games. However,
his future as a professional player was threatened when, at age 10, he was
diagnosed with a growth hormone deficiency. As his father's health insurance
covered only two years of growth hormone treatment, which cost at least $1,000
per month, Newell's agreed to contribute, but later reneged on their promise. He
was scouted by Buenos Aires club River Plate, whose playmaker, Pablo Aimar, he
idolised, but they were also unable to pay for his treatment due to the
country's economic collapse.

As the Messi family had relatives in Catalonia, they sought to arrange a trial
with Barcelona in September 2000. First team director Charly Rexach immediately
wanted to sign him, but the board of directors hesitated; at the time it was
highly unusual for European clubs to sign foreign players of such a young age.
On 14 December, an ultimatum was issued for Barcelona to prove their commitment,
and Rexach, with no other paper at hand, offered a contract on a paper napkin.
In February 2001, the family relocated to Barcelona, where they moved into an
apartment near the club's stadium, Camp Nou. During his first year in Spain,
Messi rarely played with the Infantiles due to a transfer conflict with
Newell's; as a foreigner, he could only be fielded in friendlies and the Catalan
league. Without football, he struggled to integrate into the team; already
reserved by nature, he was so quiet that his teammates initially believed he was
mute. At home, he suffered from homesickness after his mother moved back to
Rosario with his brothers and little sister, María Sol, while he stayed in
Barcelona with his father.

After a year at Barcelona's youth academy, La Masia, Messi was finally enrolled
in the Royal Spanish Football Federation (RFEF) in February 2002. Now playing in
all competitions, he befriended his teammates, among whom were Cesc Fàbregas and
Gerard Piqué. After completing his growth hormone treatment aged 14, Messi
became an integral part of the "Baby Dream Team", Barcelona's greatest-ever
youth side. During his first full season (2002–03), he was top scorer with 36
goals in 30 games for the Cadetes A, who won an unprecedented treble of the
league and both the Spanish and Catalan cups. The Copa Catalunya final, a 4–1
victory over Espanyol, became known in club lore as the partido de la máscara,
the final of the mask. A week after suffering a broken cheekbone during a league
match, Messi was allowed to start the game on the condition that he wear a
plastic protector; soon hindered by the mask, he took it off and scored two
goals in 10 minutes before his substitution. At the close of the season, he
received an offer to join Arsenal, his first from a foreign club, but while
Fàbregas and Piqué soon left for England, he chose to remain in Barcelona.

During the 2003–04 season, his fourth with Barcelona, Messi rapidly progressed
through the club's ranks, debuting for a record five teams in a single campaign.
After being named player of the tournament in four international pre-season
competitions with the Juveniles B, he played only one official match with the
team before being promoted to the Juveniles A, where he scored 18 goals in 11
league games. Messi was then one of several youth players called up to
strengthen a depleted first team during the international break. French Winger
Ludovic Giuly explained how a teenage Leo caught the eye in a training session
with Frank Rijkaard's first team: "He destroyed us all... They were kicking him
all over the place to avoid being ridiculed by this kid, he just got up and kept
on playing. He would dribble past four players and score a goal. Even the team's
starting centre-backs were nervous. He was an alien." At 16 years, four months,
and 23 days old, he made his first team debut when he came on in the 75th minute
during a friendly against José Mourinho's Porto on 16 November 2003. His
performance, creating two chances and a shot on goal, impressed the technical
staff, and he subsequently began training daily with the club's reserve side,
Barcelona B, as well as weekly with the first team. After his first training
session with the senior squad, Barça's new star player, Ronaldinho, told his
teammates that he believed the 16-year-old would become an even better player
than himself. Ronaldinho soon befriended Messi, whom he called "little brother",
which greatly eased his transition into the first team.

To gain further match experience, Messi joined Barcelona C in addition to the
Juveniles A, playing his first game for the third team on 29 November. He helped
save them from the relegation zone of the Tercera División, scoring five goals
in ten games, including a hat-trick in eight minutes during a Copa del Rey match
while man-marked by Sevilla's Sergio Ramos. His progress was reflected in his
first professional contract, signed on 4 February 2004, which lasted until 2012
and contained an initial buyout clause of €30 million. A month later, on 6
March, he made his debut for Barcelona B in the Segunda División B, and his
buyout clause automatically increased to €80 million. He played five games with
the B team that season but did not score. Physically he was weaker than his
opponents, who were often much older and taller, and in training he worked on
increasing his muscle mass and overall strength in order to be able to shake off
defenders. Towards the end of the season, he returned to both youth teams,
helping the Juveniles B win the league. He finished the campaign having scored
for four of his five teams with a total of 36 goals in all official
competitions.

During the 2004–05 season, Messi was a guaranteed starter for the B team,
playing 17 games throughout the campaign and scoring on six occasions. Since his
debut the previous November, he had not been called up to the first team again,
but in October 2004, the senior players asked manager Frank Rijkaard to promote
him. Since Ronaldinho already played on the left wing, Rijkaard moved Messi from
his usual position onto the right flank, though initially against the player's
wishes, allowing him to cut into the centre of the pitch and shoot with his
dominant left foot. Messi made his league debut during the next match on 16
October, against Espanyol, coming on in the 82nd minute. At 17 years, three
months, and 22 days old, he was at the time the youngest player to represent
Barcelona in an official competition. As a substitute player, he played only 77
minutes in nine matches for the first team that season, including his debut in
the UEFA Champions League against Shakhtar Donetsk. He scored his first senior
goal on 1 May 2005, against Albacete, from an assist by Ronaldinho, becoming –
at that time – the youngest-ever scorer for the club. Barcelona, in their second
season under Rijkaard, won the league for the first time in six years.

On 24 June 2005, his 18th birthday, Messi signed his first contract as a senior
team player. It made him a Barcelona player until 2010, two years less than his
previous contract, but his buyout clause increased to €150 million. His
breakthrough came two months later, on 24 August, during the Joan Gamper Trophy,
Barcelona's pre-season competition. A starter for the first time, he gave a
well-received performance against Fabio Capello's Juventus, receiving an ovation
from the Camp Nou. While Capello requested to loan Messi, a bid to buy him came
from Inter Milan, who were willing to pay his buyout clause and triple his
wages. According to then-president Joan Laporta, it was the only time the club
faced a real risk of losing Messi, but he ultimately decided to stay. On 16
September, his contract was updated for the second time in three months and
extended to 2014.

Due to issues regarding his legal status in the Royal Spanish Football
Federation, Messi missed the start of La Liga, but on 26 September, he acquired
Spanish citizenship and became eligible to play. Wearing the number 19 shirt, he
gradually established himself as the first-choice right winger, forming an
attacking trio with Ronaldinho and striker Samuel Eto'o. He was in the starting
line-up in major matches like his first Clásico against rivals Real Madrid on 19
November, as well as their away victory over Chelsea in the last 16 round of the
Champions League, where he played his best match to that point. After he had
scored 8 goals in 25 games, including his first in the Champions League, his
season ended prematurely during the return leg against Chelsea on 7 March 2006,
when he suffered a torn hamstring. Messi worked to regain fitness in time for
the Champions League final, but was told the day of the final, 17 May, that he
was not fit enough to play. He was so disappointed that he did not celebrate
their victory over Arsenal in Paris, something he later came to regret.

While Barcelona began a gradual decline, the 19-year-old Messi established
himself as one of the best players in the world during the 2006–07 campaign.
Already an idol to the culés, the club's supporters, he scored 17 goals in 36
games across all competitions. However, he continued to be plagued by major
injuries; a metatarsal fracture sustained on 12 November 2006 kept him out of
action for three months. He recovered in time for the last 16 round of the
Champions League against Liverpool, but was effectively marked out of the game;
Barcelona, the reigning champions, were out of the competition. In the league,
his goal contribution increased towards the end of the season; 11 of his 14
goals came from the last 13 games. On 10 March 2007, he scored his first
hat-trick in a Clásico, the first player to do so in 12 years, equalising after
each goal by Real Madrid to end the match in a 3–3 draw in extra time. His
growing importance to the club was reflected in a new contract, signed that
month, which greatly increased his wages.

Already frequently compared to compatriot Diego Maradona, Messi proved their
similarity when he nearly replicated Maradona's two most famous goals in the
span of three weeks. During a Copa del Rey semi-final against Getafe on 18
April, he scored a goal remarkably similar to Maradona's goal in the
quarter-finals of the 1986 FIFA World Cup, known as the Goal of the Century.
Messi collected the ball on the right side near the halfway line, ran 60 metres
(200 ft), and beat five defenders before scoring with an angled finish, just as
Maradona had done. A league match against Espanyol on 9 June saw him score by
launching himself at the ball and guiding it past the goalkeeper with his hand
in similar fashion to Maradona's Hand of God goal in the same World Cup match.
As Messi continued his individual rise, Barcelona faltered; the team failed to
reach the Copa del Rey final after Messi was rested during the second leg
against Getafe and lost the league to Real Madrid on goal average.

After Ronaldinho lost form, Messi became Barça's new star player at only 20
years old, receiving the nickname "Messiah" from the Spanish media. His efforts
in 2007 also earned him award recognition; journalists voted him the third-best
player of the year for the Ballon d'Or, behind Kaká and runner-up Cristiano
Ronaldo, while international managers and national team captains voted him
second for the FIFA World Player of the Year award, again behind Kaká. Although
he managed to score 16 goals during the 2007–08 campaign, the second half of his
season was again marred by injuries after he suffered a torn hamstring on 15
December. He returned to score twice in their away victory against Celtic in the
last 16 round of the Champions League, becoming the competition's top scorer at
that point with six goals, but reinjured himself during the return leg on 4
March 2008. Rijkaard had fielded him despite warning from the medical staff,
leading captain Carles Puyol to criticise the Spanish media for pressuring Messi
to play every match. Barcelona finished the season without trophies, eliminated
in the Champions League semi-finals by the eventual champions, Manchester
United, and placed third in the league.

After two unsuccessful seasons, Barcelona were in need of an overhaul, leading
to the departure of Rijkaard and Ronaldinho. Upon the latter's departure, Messi
was given the number 10 shirt. He signed a new contract in July 2008 on an
annual salary of €7.8 million, becoming the club's highest-paid player. Ahead of
the new season, a major concern remained his frequent muscular injuries, which
had left him side-lined for a total of eight months between 2006 and 2008. To
combat the problem, the club implemented new training, nutrition, and lifestyle
regimens, and assigned him a personal physiotherapist, who would travel with him
during call-ups for the Argentina national team. As a result, Messi remained
virtually injury-free during the next four years, allowing him to reach his full
potential. Despite his injuries early in the year, his performances in 2008 saw
him again voted runner-up for the Ballon d'Or and the FIFA World Player of the
Year award, both times behind Cristiano Ronaldo.

In his first uninterrupted campaign, the 2008–09 season, he scored 38 goals in
51 games, contributing alongside Eto'o and winger Thierry Henry to a total of
100 goals in all competitions, a record at the time for the club.

During his first season under Barcelona's new manager, former captain Pep
Guardiola, Messi played mainly on the right wing, like he had under Rijkaard,
though this time as a false winger with the freedom to cut inside and roam the
centre. During a Clásico on 2 May 2009, however, he played for the first time as
a false nine, positioned as a centre-forward but dropping deep into midfield to
link up with Xavi and Andrés Iniesta. He assisted with a chip his side's first
goal and scored twice to end the match in an emphatic 6–2 victory, their
greatest-ever score at Real Madrid's Santiago Bernabéu Stadium. Returning to the
wing, he played his first final since breaking into the first team on 13 May,
scoring once and assisting a second goal as they defeated Athletic Bilbao 4–1 to
win the Copa del Rey. With 23 league goals from Messi that season, they were
crowned La Liga champions three days later to win their fifth double.

As the season's Champions League top scorer with nine goals, the youngest in the
tournament's history, Messi scored two goals and assisted two more to ensure a
4–0 quarter-final victory over Bayern Munich. He returned as a false nine during
the final on 27 May in Rome, where they faced Manchester United. When he headed
the ball over goalkeeper Edwin van der Sar to make the end score 2–0, Barcelona
were champions of Europe, achieving the first treble in the history of Spanish
football. Their success was reflected in a new contract, signed on 18 September,
which committed Messi to the club through 2016 with a new buyout clause of
€250 million, while his salary increased to €12 million. Barça's prosperity
continued into the second half of 2009, as they became the first club to achieve
the sextuple, winning six top-tier trophies in a single year. After victories in
the Supercopa de España and UEFA Super Cup in August, they won the FIFA Club
World Cup against Estudiantes de La Plata on 19 December, with Messi scoring the
winning 2–1 goal with his chest. At 22 years old, Messi won the Ballon d'Or and
the FIFA World Player of the Year award, both times by the greatest voting
margin in each trophy's history.

Unsatisfied with his position on the right wing, Messi resumed playing as a
false nine in early 2010, beginning with a Champions League last 16-round match
against VfB Stuttgart. After a first-leg draw, they won the second leg 4–0 with
two goals and an assist from Messi. At that point, he effectively became the
tactical focal point of Guardiola's team, and his goalscoring rate increased.
Messi scored a total of 47 goals in all competitions that season, equal to
Ronaldo's club record from the 1996–97 campaign. He notably scored all of his
side's four goals in the Champions League quarter-final against Arsène Wenger's
Arsenal on 6 April, a rare achievement, while becoming Barcelona's all-time top
scorer in the competition. Although they were eliminated in the Champions League
semi-finals by the eventual champions, Inter Milan, Messi finished the season as
top scorer, with eight goals, for the second consecutive year. As league top
scorer in Spain and Europe with 34 goals, again tying Ronaldo's record, he
helped Barcelona win La Liga with only a single defeat.

Messi secured their first trophy of the 2010–11 campaign, the Supercopa de
España, by scoring a hat-trick in their 4–0 victory over Sevilla, after a
first-leg defeat. Assuming a playmaking role, he was again instrumental in a
Clásico on 29 November 2010, the first with José Mourinho in charge of Real
Madrid, as Barcelona defeated their rivals 5–0. Messi helped the team achieve 16
consecutive league victories, a record in Spanish football, concluding with
another hat-trick against Atlético Madrid on 5 February 2011. His club
performances in 2010 earned him the inaugural FIFA Ballon d'Or, an amalgamation
of the Ballon d'Or and the FIFA World Player of the Year award, though his win
was met with some criticism due to his lack of success with Argentina at the
2010 FIFA World Cup. Under the award's old format, he would have placed just
outside the top three, owing his win to the votes from the international coaches
and captains.

Towards the end of the season, Barcelona played four controversial Clásicos in
the span of 18 days. A league match on 16 April ended in a draw after a penalty
from Messi. After they lost the Copa del Rey final four days later, he scored
both goals in their 2–0 win in the first leg of the Champions League
semi-finals, the second of which – a dribble past three players – was acclaimed
as one of the best ever in the competition. Although he did not score, he was
again important in the second-leg draw that sent them through to the Champions
League final, where they faced Manchester United in a repeat of the final two
years earlier. As the competition's top scorer for the third consecutive year,
with 12 goals, Messi gave a man-of-the-match performance at Wembley on 28 May,
scoring the match-winning goal of their 3–1 victory. Barcelona won a third
consecutive La Liga title. In addition to his 31 goals, Messi was the league's
top assist provider with 18 assists. He finished the season with 53 goals and 24
assists in all competitions, becoming Barcelona's all-time single-season top
scorer and the first player in Spanish football to reach the 50-goal benchmark.

As Messi developed into a combination of a number 8 (a creator), a 9 (scorer),
and a 10 (assistant), he scored an unprecedented 73 goals and provided 29
assists in all club competitions during the 2011–12 season, producing a
hat-trick or more on 10 occasions. He began the campaign by helping Barcelona
win both the Spanish and European super cups; in the Supercopa de España, he
scored three times to achieve a 5–4 aggregate victory over Real Madrid,
overtaking Raúl as the competition's all-time top scorer with eight goals. At
the close of the year, on 18 December, he scored twice in the FIFA Club World
Cup final, a 4–0 victory over Santos, winning the Golden Ball as the best player
of the tournament, as he had done two years previously. For his efforts in 2011,
he again received the FIFA Ballon d'Or, becoming only the fourth player in
history to win the Ballon d'Or three times, after Johan Cruyff, Michel Platini,
and Marco van Basten. Additionally, he won the inaugural UEFA Best Player in
Europe Award, a revival of the old-style Ballon d'Or. By then, Messi was widely
considered one of the best players in history, alongside players like Diego
Maradona and Pelé.

As Messi maintained his goalscoring form into the second half of the season, the
year 2012 saw him break several longstanding records. On 7 March, two weeks
after scoring four goals in a league fixture against Valencia, he scored five
times in a Champions League last 16-round match against Bayer Leverkusen, an
unprecedented achievement in the history of the competition. In addition to
being the joint top assist provider with five assists, this feat made him top
scorer with 14 goals, tying José Altafini's record from the 1962–63 season, as
well as becoming only the second player after Gerd Müller to be top scorer in
four campaigns. Two weeks later, on 20 March, Messi became the top goalscorer in
Barcelona's history at 24 years old, overtaking the 57-year record of César
Rodríguez's 232 goals with a hat-trick against Granada.

Despite Messi's individual form, Barcelona's four-year cycle of success under
Guardiola – one of the greatest eras in the club's history – drew to an end.
Although they won the Copa del Rey against Athletic Bilbao on 25 May, their 14th
title of that period, they had lost the league to Real Madrid and were
eliminated in the Champions League semi-finals by the eventual champions,
Chelsea, with Messi sending a crucial second-leg penalty kick against the
crossbar. In their last home league match on 5 May, against Espanyol, Messi
scored all four goals before approaching the bench to embrace Guardiola, who had
announced his resignation as manager. He finished the season as league top
scorer in Spain and Europe for a second time, with 50 goals, an all-time La Liga
record, while his 73 goals in all competitions surpassed Gerd Müller's 67 goals
in the 1972–73 Bundesliga season, making him the single-season top scorer in the
history of European club football.

Under manager Tito Vilanova, who had first coached him aged 14 at La Masia,
Messi helped the club achieve their best-ever start to a La Liga season during
the second half of the year, amassing 55 points by the competition's midway
point, a record in Spanish football. A double scored on 9 December against Real
Betis saw him break two longstanding records: he surpassed César Rodríguez's
record of 190 league goals, becoming Barcelona's all-time top scorer in La Liga,
and Gerd Müller's record of most goals scored in a calendar year, overtaking his
85 goals scored in 1972 for Bayern Munich and Germany. He sent Müller a number
10 Barcelona shirt, signed "with respect and admiration", after breaking his
40-year record. At the close of the year, Messi had scored an
unprecented[according to whom?] 91 goals in all competitions for Barcelona and
Argentina. Although FIFA did not acknowledge the achievement, citing
verifiability issues, he received the Guinness World Records title for most
goals scored in a calendar year. As the odds-on favourite, Messi again won the
FIFA Ballon d'Or, becoming the only player in history to win the Ballon d'Or
four times.

Barcelona had virtually secured their La Liga title by the start of 2013,
eventually equalling Real Madrid's 100-point record of the previous season.
However, their performances deteriorated in the second half of the 2012–13
campaign, concurrently with Vilanova's absence due to ill health. After losing
successive Clásicos, including the Copa del Rey semi-finals, they were nearly
eliminated in the first knockout round of the Champions League by Milan, but a
revival of form in the second leg led to a 4–0 comeback, with two goals and an
assist from Messi. Now in his ninth senior season with Barcelona, Messi signed a
new contract on 7 February, committing himself to the club through 2018, while
his fixed wage rose to €13 million. He wore the captain's armband for the first
time a month later, on 17 March, in a league match against Rayo Vallecano; by
then, he had become the team's tactical focal point to a degree that was
arguably rivalled only by former Barcelona players Josep Samitier, László Kubala
and Johan Cruyff. Since his evolution into a false nine three years earlier, his
input into the team's attack had increased exponentially; from 24% in their
treble-winning campaign, his goal contribution rose to more than 40% that
season.

After four largely injury-free seasons, the muscular injuries that had
previously plagued Messi reoccurred. After he suffered a hamstring strain on 2
April, during the first quarter-final against Paris Saint-Germain, his
appearances became sporadic. In the second leg against PSG, with an
underperforming Barcelona down a goal, Messi came off the bench in the second
half and within nine minutes helped create their game-tying goal, which allowed
them to progress to the semi-finals. Still unfit, he proved ineffective during
the first leg against Bayern Munich and was unable to play at all during the
second, as Barcelona were defeated 7–0 on aggregate by the eventual champions.
These matches gave credence to the notion of Messidependencia, Barcelona's
perceived tactical and psychological dependence on their star player.

Messi continued to struggle with injury throughout 2013, eventually parting ways
with his long-time personal physiotherapist. Further damage to his hamstring
sustained on 12 May ended his goalscoring streak of 21 consecutive league games,
a worldwide record; he had netted 33 goals during his run, including a four-goal
display against Osasuna, while becoming the first player to score consecutively
against all 19 opposition teams in La Liga. With 60 goals in all competitions,
including 46 goals in La Liga, he finished the campaign as league top scorer in
Spain and Europe for the second consecutive year, becoming the first player in
history to win the European Golden Shoe three times. Following an irregular
start to the new season under manager Gerardo Martino, formerly of his boyhood
club Newell's Old Boys, Messi suffered his fifth injury that year when he tore
his hamstring on 10 November, leaving him sidelined for two months. Despite his
injuries, he was voted runner-up for the FIFA Ballon d'Or, relinquishing the
award after a four-year monopoly to Cristiano Ronaldo.

During the second half of the 2013–14 season, doubts persisted over Messi's
form, leading to a perception among the culés that he was reserving himself for
the 2014 FIFA World Cup. Statistically, his contribution of goals, shots, and
passes had dropped significantly compared to previous seasons. He still produced
fine moments, as he did when he broke two longstanding records in seven days: a
hat-trick on 16 March against Osasuna saw him overtake Paulino Alcántara's 369
goals to become Barcelona's top goalscorer in all competitions including
friendlies, while another hat-trick against Real Madrid on 23 March made him the
all-time top scorer in El Clásico, ahead of the 18 goals scored by former Real
Madrid player Alfredo Di Stéfano. Messi finished the campaign with his worst
output in five seasons, though he still managed to score 41 goals in all
competitions. For the first time in five years, Barcelona ended the season
without a major trophy; they were defeated in the Copa del Rey final by Real
Madrid and lost the league in the last game to Atlético Madrid, causing Messi to
be booed by sections of fans at the Camp Nou.

After prolonged speculation over his future with the club, Messi signed a new
contract on 19 May 2014, only a year after his last contractual update; his
salary increased to €20 million, or €36 million before taxes, the highest wage
ever in the sport. Under their new manager, former captain Luis Enrique, Messi
experienced a largely injury-free start to the 2014–15 season, allowing him to
break three more longstanding records towards the end of the year. A hat-trick
scored against Sevilla on 22 November made him the all-time top scorer in La
Liga, as he surpassed the 59-year record of 251 league goals held by Telmo
Zarra. Three days later, he scored another hat-trick against APOEL, overtaking
Raúl's 71 goals to become top scorer in the history of the Champions League. A
third hat-trick, scored against city rivals Espanyol on 7 December, allowed him
to surpass César Rodríguez as the all-time top scorer in the Derbi barceloní
with 12 goals. Messi again placed second in the FIFA Ballon d'Or behind
Cristiano Ronaldo, largely owing to his second-place achievement with Argentina
at the World Cup.

At the start of 2015, Barcelona were perceived to be headed for another
disappointing end to the season, with renewed speculation in the media that
Messi was leaving the club. A turning point came on 11 January during a 3–1
victory over Atlético Madrid, the first time Barça's attacking trident of Messi,
Luis Suárez and Neymar, dubbed "MSN", each scored in a match, marking the
beginning of a highly successful run. After five years of playing in the centre
of the pitch, Messi had returned to his old position on the right wing late the
previous year, by his own suggestion according to Suárez, their striker. From
there, he regained his best – arguably his best-ever – form, while Suárez and
Neymar ended the team's attacking dependency on their star player. With 58 goals
from Messi, the trio scored a total of 122 goals in all competitions that
season, a record in Spanish football.

Towards the end of the campaign, Messi scored the only goal in a 1–0 away win
over Atlético Madrid on 17 May, securing the La Liga title. Among his 43 league
goals that season was a hat-trick scored in 11 minutes against Rayo Vallecano on
8 March, the fastest of his senior career; it was his 32nd hat-trick overall for
Barcelona, allowing him to overtake Telmo Zarra as the player with the most
hat-tricks ever in Spanish football. Additionally, as the season's top assist
provider with 18 assists, he surpassed Luís Figo as the player with the most
assists in La Liga;[note 4] he made his record 106th assist in a fixture against
Levante on 15 February, in which he also scored a hat-trick. Messi then scored
twice as Barcelona defeated Athletic Bilbao 3–1 in the Copa del Rey final on 30
May, achieving the sixth double in their history. His opening goal was hailed as
one of the greatest in his career; he collected the ball near the halfway line
and beat four opposing players, before feinting the goalkeeper to score in a
tight space by the near post. The goal was later named one of the three final
nominees for the 2015 FIFA Puskás Award.

In the Champions League, Messi scored twice and assisted on another in their 3–0
semi-final victory over Bayern Munich, now under the stewardship of Guardiola.
His second goal, which came only three minutes after his first, saw him chip the
ball over goalkeeper Manuel Neuer after his dribble past Jérôme Boateng had made
the defender drop to the ground; it went viral, becoming the year's most tweeted
about sporting moment, and was named the best goal of the season by UEFA.
Despite a second-leg loss, Barcelona progressed to the final on 6 June in
Berlin, where they defeated Juventus 3–1 to win their second treble, becoming
the first club in history to win the league, domestic cup, and European cup
twice. Although Messi did not score, he participated in each of his side's
goals, particularly the second as he forced a parried save from goalkeeper
Gianluigi Buffon from which Suárez scored the match-winning goal on the rebound.
In addition to being the top assist provider with six assists, Messi finished
the competition as the joint top scorer with ten goals, which earned him the
distinction of being the first player ever to achieve the top scoring mark in
five Champions League seasons. For his efforts during the season, he received
the UEFA Best Player in Europe award for a second time.

Messi opened the 2015–16 season by scoring twice from free kicks in Barcelona's
5–4 victory over Sevilla in the UEFA Super Cup. A subsequent 5–1 aggregate
defeat against Athletic Bilbao in the Supercopa de España ended their expressed
hopes of a second sextuple, with Messi scoring his side's only goal. On 16
September, he became the youngest player to make 100 appearances in the UEFA
Champions League in a 1–1 away draw to Roma. On 26 September, Messi sustained an
injury in Barcelona's match against Las Palmas; tests later confirmed that he
suffered a tear in the medial collateral ligament of his left knee, ruling him
out for six to eight weeks. He finally returned to the pitch on 21 November,
making a substitute appearance in Barcelona's 4–0 away win over rivals Real
Madrid in El Clásico. Messi capped off the year by opening the scoring in the
36th minute of the 2015 FIFA Club World Cup Final on 20 December, collecting his
fifth club trophy of 2015 as Barcelona went on to defeat River Plate 3–0 in
Yokohama, and winning the tournament's Silver Ball, despite missing the
semi-final. On 30 December, Messi scored on his 500th appearance for Barcelona,
in a 4–0 home win over Real Betis.

On 6 January 2016, recording Barcelona's first goal of the new year, Messi
scored two goals and assisted the other two in a 4–1 derby win over Espanyol at
the Camp Nou, in the first leg of the round of 16 of the 2015–16 Copa del Rey.
Five days later, Messi won the FIFA Ballon d'Or for a record fifth time in his
career. On 3 February, he scored a hat-trick in Barcelona's 7–0 win against
Valenciain the first leg of the Copa del Rey semi-final at the Camp Nou, also
scoring his 500th career goal in the process, including youth competitions. With
teammate Luis Suárez scoring the other four goals in the same match, this was
the first time that two players had scored at least three goals each at Camp
Nou, and the first time since Luis Suárez Miramontes and Justo Tejada in 1956.
The feat had only occurred three times before in the club's history, all at Camp
de Les Corts. The next league match at Camp Nou, a 6–1 win against Celta de
Vigo, Messi assisted Suárez from a penalty kick. Some people saw it as "a touch
of genius", while others criticised it as being disrespectful to the opponent.
The Celta players, however, never complained and their coach defended the
penalty, stating, "Barca's forwards are very respectful." The penalty routine
has been compared to that of Barça icon Johan Cruyff in 1982, who was battling
lung cancer, leading many fans to indicate that the penalty was a tribute to
him. Cruyff himself was "very happy" with the play, insisting "it was legal and
entertaining".

On 17 February, Messi reached his 300th league goal in a 1–3 away win against
Sporting de Gijón. A few days later, he scored both goals in Barcelona's 0–2 win
against Arsenal at the Emirates Stadium, in the first leg of the 2015–16 UEFA
Champions League round of 16, with the second goal being Barcelona's 10,000th in
official competitions. On 17 April, Messi ended a five-match scoring drought
with his 500th senior career goal for club and country in Barcelona's 2–1 home
loss to Valencia. Messi finished the 2015–16 season by setting up both goals in
Barcelona's 2–0 extra time win over Sevilla in the 2016 Copa del Rey Final, at
the Vicente Calderón Stadium, on 22 May 2016, as the club celebrated winning the
domestic double for the second consecutive season. In total, Messi scored 41
goals and provided 23 assists, as Barcelona's attacking trio managed a Spanish
record of 131 goals throughout the season, breaking the record they had set the
previous season.

Messi opened the 2016–17 season by lifting the 2016 Supercopa de España as
Barcelona's captain in the absence of the injured Andrés Iniesta; he set-up
Munir's goal in a 2–0 away win over Sevilla in the first leg on 14 August, and
subsequently scored and assisted in a 3–0 win in the return leg on 17 August.
Three days later, he scored two goals and provided an assist to lead Barcelona
to a 6–2 victory against Real Betis in the opening game of the 2016–17 La Liga
season. On 13 September 2016, Messi scored his first hat-trick of the season in
the opening game of the 2016–17 UEFA Champions League campaign against Celtic in
a 7–0 victory; this was also Messi's sixth hat-trick in the Champions League,
the most by any player. A week later, Messi sustained a groin injury in a 1–1
draw against Atlético Madrid and was ruled out with injury for three weeks. He
marked his return with a goal, scoring three minutes after coming off the bench
in a 4–0 home win over Deportivo de La Coruña, on 16 October. Three days after
this, he netted his seventh Champions League hat-trick as Barcelona defeated
Manchester City 4–0. On 1 November, Messi scored his 54th Champions League group
stage goal in Barcelona's 3–1 away return fixture to Manchester City, surpassing
the previous record of 53 goals held by Raúl. On 12 November, Messi placed
second in the 2016 Ballon d'Or behind Cristiano Ronaldo, who claimed the award
for the fourth time. He finished the year with 51 goals, making him Europe's top
scorer, one ahead of Zlatan Ibrahimovic.

After placing second in the 2016 Ballon d'Or, on 9 January 2017, Messi also
finished in second place, behind Cristiano Ronaldo once again, in the 2016 Best
FIFA Men's Player Award. On 11 January, Messi scored from a free-kick in
Barcelona's 3–1 victory against Athletic Bilbao in the 2nd leg of the round of
16 of the Copa del Rey, which enabled Barcelona to advance to the quarter-finals
of the competition; with his 26th goal from a free-kick for Barcelona in all
competitions, he equalled the club's all-time record, which had previously been
set by Ronald Koeman. In his next league match on 14 January, Messi scored in a
5–0 win against Las Palmas; with this goal he equalled Raúl's record for the
most number of teams scored against in La Liga (35). On 4 February, Messi scored
his 27th free-kick for Barcelona in a 3–0 home win over Athletic Bilbao in the
league, overtaking Ronald Koeman as the club's all-time top-scorer from
free-kicks.

As a dual Argentine-Spanish national, Messi was eligible to play for the
national team of both countries. Selectors for Spain's Under-17 squad began
pursuing him in 2003 after Barcelona's director of football, Carles Rexach,
alerted the Royal Spanish Football Federation to their young player. Messi
declined the offer, having aspired to represent La Albiceleste since childhood.
To further prevent Spain from taking him, the Argentine Football Association
organised two under-20 friendlies in June 2004, against Paraguay and Uruguay,
with the purpose of finalising his status as an Argentina player in FIFA. Five
days after his 17th birthday, on 29 June, he made his debut for his country
against Paraguay, scoring once and providing two assists in their 8–0 victory.
He was subsequently included in the squad for the South American Youth
Championship, held in Colombia in February 2005. As he lacked the stamina of his
teammates, the result of his former growth hormone deficiency, he was used as a
substitute in six of the nine games, proving more effective when coming on in
the second half. After being named man of the match against Venezuela, he scored
the winning 2–1 goal in the crucial last match against Brazil, thereby securing
their third-place qualification for the FIFA World Youth Championship.

Aware of his physical limitations, Messi employed a personal trainer to increase
his muscle mass, returning to the squad in improved condition in time for the
World Youth Championship, hosted by the Netherlands in June 2005. After he was
left out of the starting line-up in their first match against the United States,
a 1–0 defeat, the squad's senior players asked manager Francisco Ferraro to let
Messi start, as they considered him their best player. After helping the team
defeat Egypt and Germany to progress past the group stage, Messi proved decisive
in the knockout phase as he scored their equaliser against Colombia, provided a
goal and an assist against title favourites Spain, and scored their opening goal
against reigning champions Brazil. Ahead of the final, he was awarded the Golden
Ball as the best player of the tournament. He scored two penalties in their 2–1
victory over Nigeria, clinching Argentina's fifth championship and finishing the
tournament as top scorer with 6 goals. His performances drew comparisons with
compatriot Diego Maradona, who had led Argentina to the title in 1979.

In recognition of his achievements with the under-20 side, senior manager José
Pékerman gave Messi his first call-up for a friendly against Hungary on 17
August 2005. Aged 18, Messi made his senior debut for Argentina when he came on
in the 63rd minute, only to be sent off after two minutes for a perceived foul
against Vilmos Vanczák, who had grabbed his shirt; Messi had struck the defender
with his arm while trying to shake him off, which the referee interpreted as an
intentional elbowing, a contentious decision. Messi was reportedly found weeping
in the dressing room after his sending-off. He returned to the team on 3
September in their World Cup qualifier defeat to Paraguay, which he had declared
his "re-debut" ahead of the match. Messi started his first game in the next
qualifying match against Peru, in which he was able to win a crucial penalty
that secured their victory. After the match, Pékerman described him as "a
jewel". He subsequently made regular appearances for the team ahead of
Argentina's participation in the 2006 FIFA World Cup, scoring his first goal in
a friendly against Croatia on 1 March 2006. A hamstring injury sustained a week
later jeopardised his presence in the World Cup, but he was nevertheless
selected for Pékerman's squad and regained fitness in time for the start of the
tournament.

During the World Cup in Germany, Messi witnessed their opening match victory
against the Ivory Coast from the substitutes' bench. In the next match, against
Serbia and Montenegro, he became the youngest player to represent Argentina at a
FIFA World Cup when he came on as a substitute in the 74th minute. He assisted
their fourth strike within minutes and scored the final goal in their 6–0
victory, making him the youngest scorer in the tournament and the sixth-youngest
goalscorer in the history of the World Cup. As their progression to the knockout
phase was secured, several starters were rested during the last group match.
Messi consequently started the game against the Netherlands, a 0–0 draw, as they
won their group on goal differential. In the round of 16 match against Mexico,
played on his 19th birthday, Messi came on in the 84th minute, with the score
tied at 1–1. He appeared to score a goal, but it was contentiously ruled
offside, with the team needing a late goal in extra time to proceed. He did not
play in the quarter-final against Germany, during which Argentina were
eliminated 4–2 in a penalty shootout. Back home, Pékerman's decision to leave
him on the bench against Germany led to widespread criticism from those who
believed Messi could have changed the outcome of the match in Argentina's
favour.

As Messi evolved into one of the best players in the world, he secured a place
in Alfio Basile's starting line-up, as part of a team considered favourites to
win the 2007 Copa América, held in Venezuela. He set up the game-winning goal of
their 4–1 victory over the United States in the opening match, before winning a
penalty that led to the game-tying first strike of their 4–2 win in the next
match against Colombia. As they had secured their place in the knockout phase,
Messi started the next game on the bench, coming on in the last 25 minutes with
the score at 0–0 to help his team defeat Paraguay by assisting their only goal.
At the quarter-final stage, where the group winners faced Peru, he scored the
second goal of a 4–0 victory that saw them through to the semi-final, during
which he chipped the ball over Mexico's goalkeeper to ensure another 3–0 win. In
a surprise defeat, Argentina lost the final 3–0 to a Brazil squad which lacked
several of the nation's best players. Their unexpected loss was followed by much
criticism in Argentina, though Messi was mostly exempt due to his young age and
secondary status to star player Juan Román Riquelme. He was named the best young
player of the tournament by CONMEBOL.

Ahead of the 2008 Summer Olympics, Barcelona legally barred Messi from
representing Argentina at the tournament as it coincided with their Champions
League qualifying matches. After interference from newly appointed Barcelona
manager Pep Guardiola, who had won the tournament in 1992, Messi was permitted
to join Sergio Batista's under-23 squad in Beijing. During the first match, he
scored the opening goal and assisted another in their 2–1 victory over the Ivory
Coast. Following a 1–0 win in the next group match against Australia, ensuring
their quarter-final qualification, Messi was rested during the game against
Serbia, while his side won the match to finish first in their group. Against the
Netherlands, he again scored the first goal and assisted a second strike to help
his team to a 2–1 win in extra time. After a 3–0 semi-final victory over Brazil,
Messi assisted the only goal in the final as Argentina defeated Nigeria to claim
Olympic gold medals. Along with Riquelme, Messi was singled out by FIFA as the
stand-out player from the tournament's best team.

From late 2008, the national team experienced a three-year period marked by poor
performances. Under manager Diego Maradona, who had led Argentina to World Cup
victory as a player, the team struggled to qualify for the 2010 World Cup,
securing their place in the tournament only after defeating Uruguay 1–0 in their
last qualifying match. Maradona was criticised for his strategic decisions as he
played Messi out of position, positioned too deep for him to be able to
contribute to the attack to his full ability. In eight qualifying matches under
Maradona's stewardship, Messi scored only one goal, netting the opening goal in
the first such match, a 4–0 victory over Venezuela. During that game, played on
28 March 2009, he wore Argentina's number 10 shirt for the first time, following
the international retirement of Riquelme. Overall, Messi scored four goals in 18
appearances during the qualifying process. Ahead of the tournament, Maradona
visited Messi in Barcelona to request his tactical input; Messi then outlined a
4–3–1–2 formation with himself playing behind the two strikers, a playmaking
position known as the enganche in Argentine football, which had been his
preferred position since childhood.

Despite their poor qualifying campaign, Argentina were considered title
contenders at the World Cup in South Africa. At the start of the tournament, the
new formation proved effective; Messi managed at least four attempts on goal
during their opening match but was repeatedly denied by Nigeria's goalkeeper,
resulting in a 1–0 win. During the next match, against South Korea, he excelled
in his playmaking role, participating in all four goals of his side's 4–1
victory. As their place in the knockout phase was guaranteed, most of the
starters were rested during the last group match, but Messi reportedly refused
to be benched. He wore the captain's armband for the first time in their 2–0 win
against Greece; as the focal point of their play, he helped create their second
goal to see Argentina finish as group winners. In the round of 16, they defeated
Mexico 3–1, with Messi assisting their first goal, a controversial strike that
stood despite being offside.

Argentina's unstructured defence had proved a liability throughout the World Cup
and finally led to their elimination in the quarter-final against Germany, at
the same stage of the tournament and by the same opponent as four years earlier.
Their 4–0 loss was their worst margin of defeat since 1974. FIFA subsequently
identified Messi as one of the tournament's 10 best players, citing his
"outstanding" pace and creativity and "spectacular and efficient" dribbling,
shooting and passing. Back home, however, Messi was the subject of far harsher
judgement. As the perceived best player in the world, he had been expected to
lead an average team to the title, as Maradona arguably did in 1986, but he had
failed to replicate his performances at Barcelona with the national team,
leading to the accusation that he cared less about his country than his club.

Maradona was replaced by Sergio Batista, who had orchestrated Argentina's
Olympic victory. Batista publicly stated that he intended to build the team
around Messi, employing him as a false nine within a 4–3–3 system, as used to
much success by Barcelona. Although Messi scored a record 53 goals during the
2010–11 club season, he had not scored for Argentina in an official match since
March 2009. Despite the tactical change, his goal drought continued during the
2011 Copa América, hosted by Argentina. Their first two matches, against Bolivia
and Colombia, ended in draws, with Messi underperforming by his standards. Media
and fans noted that he did not combine well with striker Carlos Tevez, who
enjoyed far greater popularity among the Argentine public; Messi was
consequently booed by his own team's supporters for the first time in his
career. During the crucial next match, with Tevez on the bench, he gave a
well-received performance, assisting two goals in their 3–0 victory over Costa
Rica. After the quarter-final against Uruguay ended in a 1–1 draw following
extra time, with Messi having assisted their equaliser, Argentina were
eliminated 4–5 in the penalty shootout by the eventual champions.

After Argentina's unsuccessful performance in the Copa América, Batista was
replaced by Alejandro Sabella. Upon his appointment in August 2011, Sabella
awarded the 24-year-old Messi the captaincy of the squad, in accord with
then-captain Javier Mascherano. Reserved by nature, Messi went on to lead his
squad by example as their best player, while Mascherano continued to fulfil the
role of the team's on-field leader and motivator. In a further redesign of the
team, Sabella dismissed Tevez and brought in players with whom Messi had won the
World Youth Championship and Olympic Games. Now playing in a free role in an
improving team, Messi finally ended his goal drought by scoring during their
first World Cup qualifying match against Chile on 7 October, his first official
goal for Argentina in two-and-a-half years.

Under Sabella, Messi's goalscoring rate drastically increased; where he had
scored only 17 goals in 61 matches under his previous managers, he scored 25
times in 32 appearances during the following three years. He netted a total of
12 goals in 9 games for Argentina in 2012, equalling the record held by Gabriel
Batistuta, Argentina's all-time top scorer, for the most goals scored in a
calendar year for their country. His first hat-trick with the Albicelestes came
in a friendly against Switzerland on 29 February 2012, followed by two more
hat-tricks over the next year-and-a-half in friendlies against Brazil and
Guatemala. Messi then helped the team secure their place in the 2014 World Cup
with a 5–2 victory over Paraguay on 10 September 2013; in addition to providing
an assist, he scored twice from a penalty kick, taking his international tally
to 37 goals to become Argentina's second-highest goalscorer behind only
Batistuta. Overall, he had scored a total of 10 goals in 14 matches during the
qualifying campaign. Concurrently with his bettered performances, his
relationship with his compatriots improved, as he gradually began to be
perceived more favourably in Argentina.

Ahead of the World Cup in Brazil, doubts persisted over Messi's form, as he
finished an unsuccessful and injury-plagued season with Barcelona. At the start
of the tournament, however, he gave strong performances, being elected man of
the match in their first four matches. In his first World Cup match as captain,
he led them to a 2–1 victory over Bosnia and Herzegovina; he helped create their
early opening goal and scored their second strike after a dribble past three
players, his first World Cup goal since his debut in the tournament eight years
earlier. During the second match against Iran, he scored an injury-time goal
from 23 metres out to end the game in a 1–0 win, securing their qualification
for the knockout phase. He scored twice in the last group match, a 3–2 victory
over Nigeria, his second goal from a free kick, as they finished first in their
group. Messi assisted a late goal in extra time to ensure a 1–0 win against
Switzerland in the round of 16, before starting the play that led to their
match-winning 1–0 goal in the quarter-final against Belgium, helping Argentina
progress to the semi-final of the World Cup for the first time since 1990.
Following a 0–0 draw in extra time, they eliminated the Netherlands 4–2 in a
penalty shootout to reach the final.

Billed as Messi versus Germany, the world's best player against the best team,
the final was a repeat of the 1990 final featuring Diego Maradona. Within the
first half-hour, Messi had started the play that led to a goal, but it was ruled
offside. He missed several opportunities to open the scoring throughout the
match, in particular at the start of the second half when his breakaway effort
went wide of the far post. Substitute Mario Götze finally scored in the 113th
minute, followed in the last minute of extra time by a free kick that Messi sent
over the net, as Germany won the match 1–0 to claim the World Cup. At the
conclusion of the final, Messi was awarded the Golden Ball as the best player of
the tournament. In addition to being the joint third-highest goalscorer, with
four goals and an assist, he created the most chances, completed the most
dribbling runs, made the most deliveries into the penalty area and produced the
most throughballs in the competition. However, his selection drew criticism due
to his lack of goals in the knockout round; FIFA President Sepp Blatter
expressed his surprise, while Maradona suggested that Messi had undeservedly
been chosen for marketing purposes.

Another final appearance, the third of Messi's senior international career,
followed in the 2015 Copa América, held in Chile. Under the stewardship of
former Barcelona manager Gerardo Martino, Argentina entered the tournament as
title contenders due to their second-place achievement at the World Cup. During
the opening match against Paraguay, they were ahead two goals by half-time but
lost their lead to end the match in a 2–2 draw; Messi had scored from a penalty
kick, netting his only goal in the tournament. Following a 1–0 win against
defending champions Uruguay, Messi earned his 100th cap for his country in the
final group match, a 1–0 win over Jamaica, becoming only the fifth Argentine to
achieve this milestone. In his 100 appearances, he had scored a total of 46
goals for Argentina, 22 of which came in official competitive matches.

As Messi evolved from the team's symbolic captain into a genuine leader, he led
Argentina to the knockout stage as group winners. In the quarter-final, they
created numerous chances, including a rebound header by Messi, but were
repeatedly denied by Colombia's goalkeeper, and ultimately ended the match
scoreless, leading to a 5–4 penalty shootout in their favour. At the semi-final
stage, Messi excelled as playmaker as he provided three assists and helped
create three more goals in his side's 6–1 victory over Paraguay, receiving
applause from the initially hostile crowd. Argentina started the final as the
odds-on title favourites, but were defeated by Chile 4–1 in a penalty shootout
after an 0–0 extra-time draw. Faced with aggression from opposing players,
including taking a boot to the midriff, Messi played below his standards, though
he was the only Argentine to successfully convert his penalty. At the close of
the tournament, he was reportedly selected to receive the Most Valuable Player
award but rejected the honour. As Argentina continued a trophy drought that
began in 1993, the World Cup and Copa América defeats again brought intense
criticism for Messi from Argentine media and fans.

Messi's place in Argentina's Copa América Centenario squad was initially put in
jeopardy when he sustained a back injury in a 1–0 friendly win over Honduras in
a pre-Copa América warm-up match on 27 May 2016. It was later reported that he
had suffered a deep bruise in his lumbar region, but that he would remain in
Martino's squad for the tournament, although he was later left on the bench in
Argentina's 2–1 opening win over defending champions Chile on 6 June due to
concerns regarding his fitness. Although Messi was declared match-fit for his
nation's second group match against Panama on 10 June, Martino left him on the
bench once again; he replaced Augusto Fernández in the 61st minute and
subsequently scored a hat-trick in 19 minutes, also starting the play which led
to Sergio Agüero's goal, as the match ended in a 5–0 victory, sealing
Argentina's place in the quarter-finals of the competition; he was elected man
of the match for his performance.

On 18 June 2016, in the quarter-final of the Copa América against Venezuela,
Messi produced another man of the match performance, assisting two goals and
scoring another in a 4–1 victory, which enabled him to equal Gabriel Batistuta's
national record of 54 goals in official international matches. This record was
broken three days later when Messi scored in a 4–0 win in the semi-final of the
Copa América against hosts the United States; he also assisted two goals during
the match as Argentina sealed a place in the final of the competition for a
second consecutive year, and was named man of the match once again.

During a repeat of the previous year's final on 26 June, Argentina once again
lost to Chile on penalties after a 0–0 deadlock, resulting in Messi's third
consecutive defeat in a major tournament final with Argentina, and his fourth
overall. After the match, Messi, who had missed his penalty in the shootout,
announced his retirement from international football. Sources reported that
other Argentine players – Sergio Agüero, Javier Mascherano, Gonzalo Higuaín,
Lucas Biglia, Éver Banega, Ezequiel Lavezzi and Ángel Di María – could follow
their captain in retiring from international football. Chile coach Juan Antonio
Pizzi said after the match, "My generation can’t compare him to Maradona that's
for my generation, because of what Maradona did for Argentine football. But I
think the best player ever played today here in the United States." Messi
finished the tournament as the second highest scorer, behind Eduardo Vargas,
with five goals, and was the highest assist provider with four assists, also
winning more Man of the Match awards than any other player in the tournament
(3); he was named to the team of the tournament for his performances, but missed
out on the Golden Ball Award for best player, which went to Alexis Sánchez.

Following his announcement, a campaign began in Argentina for Messi to change
his mind about retiring. He was greeted by fans with signs like "Don't go, Leo"
when the team landed in Buenos Aires. President of Argentina Mauricio Macri
urged Messi not to quit, stating, "We are lucky, it is one of life's pleasures,
it is a gift from God to have the best player in the world in a footballing
country like ours... Lionel Messi is the greatest thing we have in Argentina and
we must take care of him." Mayor of Buenos Aires Horacio Rodríguez Larreta
unveiled a statue of Messi in the capital to convince him reconsider retirement.
On social networks, NoTeVayasLeo became a global trending topic, and even a
playlist on Spotify. The campaign also continued in the streets and avenues of
the Argentine capital, with about 50,000 supporters going to the Obelisco de
Buenos Aires on 2 July, using the same slogan.

Just a week after Messi announced his international retirement, Argentine
newspaper La Nación reported that he was reconsidering playing for Argentina at
the 2018 FIFA World Cup qualifiers in September. On 12 August, it was confirmed
that Messi had reversed his decision to retire from international football, and
he was included in the squad for the national team's upcoming 2018 World Cup
qualifiers. On 1 September, in his first game for Argentina after reversing his
decision to retire, he scored the only goal in a 1–0 home win over Uruguay in a
2018 World Cup qualifier.

Due to his short stature, Messi has a lower centre of gravity than taller
players, which gives him greater agility, allowing him to change direction more
quickly and evade opposing tackles; this has led the Spanish media to dub him La
Pulga Atómica ("The Atomic Flea"). Despite being physically unimposing, he
possesses significant upper-body strength, which, combined with his low centre
of gravity and resulting balance, aids him in withstanding physical challenges
from opponents; he has consequently been noted for his lack of diving in a sport
rife with playacting. His short, strong legs allow him to excel in short bursts
of acceleration while his quick feet enable him to retain control of the ball
when dribbling at speed. His former Barcelona manager Pep Guardiola once stated,
"Messi is the only player that runs faster with the ball than he does without
it." Although he has improved his ability with his weaker foot since his
mid-20s, Messi is predominantly a left-footed player; with the outside of his
left foot, he usually begins dribbling runs, while he uses the inside of his
foot to finish and provide passes and assists.

A prolific goalscorer, Messi is known for his finishing, positioning, quick
reactions, and ability to make attacking runs to beat the defensive line. He
also functions in a playmaking role, courtesy of his vision and precise passing,
and is an accurate free kick and penalty kick taker, though his ability on
penalties has somewhat deteriorated in recent seasons. His pace and technical
ability enable him to undertake individual dribbling runs towards goal, in
particular during counterattacks, usually starting from the halfway line or the
right side of the pitch. Widely considered to be the best dribbler in the world,
and one of the greatest of all time, with regard to this ability, his former
Argentina manager Diego Maradona has said of him, "The ball stays glued to his
foot; I've seen great players in my career, but I've never seen anyone with
Messi's ball control." Beyond his individual qualities, he is also a
well-rounded, hard-working team player, known for his creative combinations, in
particular with Barcelona midfielders Xavi and Andrés Iniesta.

Tactically, Messi plays in a free attacking role; a versatile player, he is
capable of attacking on either wing or through the centre of the pitch. His
favoured position in childhood was the playmaker behind two strikers, known as
the enganche in Argentine football, but he began his career in Spain as a
left-winger or left-sided forward. Upon his first-team debut, he was moved onto
the right wing by manager Frank Rijkaard; from this position, he could more
easily cut through the defence into the middle of the pitch and curl shots on
goal with his left foot, rather than predominantly cross balls for teammates.
Under Guardiola and subsequent managers, he most often played in a false nine
role; positioned as a centre-forward or lone striker, he would roam the centre,
often moving deep into midfield and drawing defenders with him, in order to
create and exploit spaces for passes, dribbling runs or combinations with Xavi
and Iniesta. Under the stewardship of Luis Enrique, Messi returned to playing in
the right-sided position that characterised much of his early career, while also
being deployed in a deeper, free role. With the Argentina national team, Messi
has similarly played anywhere along the frontline; under various managers, he
has been employed on the right wing, as a false nine, or in a deeper, creative
role as a classic number 10 or attacking midfielder.

A prodigious talent as a teenager, Messi established himself among the world's
best players before age 20. Diego Maradona considered the 18-year-old Messi the
best player in the world alongside Ronaldinho, while the Brazilian himself,
shortly after winning the Ballon d'Or, commented, "I'm not even the best at
Barça," in reference to his protégé. Four years later, after Messi had won his
first Ballon d'Or by a record margin, the public debate regarding his qualities
as a player moved beyond his status in contemporary football to the possibility
that he was the greatest player in history. An early proponent was his
then-manager Pep Guardiola, who, as early as August 2009, declared Messi to be
the best player he had ever seen. In the following years, this opinion gained
greater acceptance among pundits, managers, former and current players, and by
the end of Barça's second treble-winning season, Messi's superiority, ahead of
Maradona and Pelé, had become the predominant view among insiders in continental
Europe. A frequent dismissal, however, has centred on the fact that Messi has
not won the FIFA World Cup with Argentina, leading some in the sport to instead
cite him as the best club player in history.

Throughout his career, Messi has been compared with his compatriot Diego
Maradona, due to their similar playing styles as diminutive, left-footed
dribblers. Initially, he was merely one of many young Argentine players,
including his boyhood idol Pablo Aimar, to receive the "New Maradona" moniker,
but as his career progressed, Messi proved his similarity beyond all previous
contenders, establishing himself as the greatest player Argentina had produced
since Maradona. Jorge Valdano, who won the 1986 World Cup alongside Maradona,
said in October 2013, "Messi is Maradona every day. For the last five years,
Messi has been the Maradona of the World Cup in Mexico." César Menotti, who as
manager orchestrated their 1978 World Cup victory, echoed this sentiment when he
opined that Messi plays "at the level of the best Maradona". Other notable
Argentines in the sport, such as Osvaldo Ardiles, Javier Zanetti, and Diego
Simeone, have expressed their belief that Messi has overtaken Maradona as the
best player in history.

In Argentine society, Messi is generally held in lesser esteem than Maradona, a
consequence of not only his uneven performances with the national team, but also
of differences in class, personality, and background. Messi is in some ways the
antithesis of his predecessor: where Maradona was an extroverted, controversial
character who rose to greatness from the slums, Messi is reserved and
unassuming, an unremarkable man outside of football. An enduring mark against
him is the fact that, although through no fault of his own, he never proved
himself in the Argentine Primera División as an upcoming player, achieving
stardom overseas from a young age, while his lack of outward passion for the
Albiceleste shirt—he does not sing the national anthem and is disinclined to
emotional displays—have in the past led to the false perception that he felt
Catalan rather than truly Argentine. Despite having lived in Spain since age 13,
Messi has said: "Argentina is my country, my family, my way of expressing
myself. I would change all my records to make the people in my country happy."
In November 2016, with the Argentine Football Association being run by a FIFA
committee for emergency due to an economic crisis, it was reported that three of
the national team's security staff told Messi that they haven't been given their
salaries for six months. He has stepped in and paid the salaries of the three
members.

Among his contemporary peers, Messi is most often compared and contrasted with
Portuguese forward Cristiano Ronaldo, as part of an ongoing rivalry that has
been compared to past sports rivalries like the Muhammad Ali–Joe Frazier rivalry
in boxing, the Björn Borg–John McEnroe rivalry in tennis, and the Ayrton
Senna–Alain Prost rivalry from Formula One. Although Messi has at times denied
any rivalry, they are widely believed to push one another in their aim to be the
best player in the world: since 2008, Ronaldo has won four Ballons d'Or to
Messi's five, and four European Golden Shoes to Messi's three. Pundits and fans
regularly argue the individual merits of both players; beyond their playing
styles, the debate also revolves around their differing physiques—Ronaldo is
1.85 m (6 ft 1 in) with a muscular build—and contrasting public personalities,
with Ronaldo's self-confidence and theatrics a foil to Messi's humility. Messi
faces Ronaldo at least twice every season in El Clásico, which ranks among the
world's most viewed annual sports events. Off the pitch, Ronaldo is his direct
competitor in terms of salary, sponsorships, and social media fanbase.

According to France Football, Messi was the world's highest-paid footballer for
five years out of six between 2009 and 2014; he was the first player to exceed
the €40 million benchmark, with earnings of €41 million in 2013, and the
€50–€60 million points, with income of €65 million in 2014. In 2016, Messi was
second on Forbes list of the world's highest-paid athletes (after Cristiano
Ronaldo) with income of $81.4 million from his salary and endorsements in
2015–16. Since 2008, he has been Barcelona's highest-paid player, receiving a
salary that increased incrementally from €7.8 million to €13 million over the
next five years. His current salary of €20 million net (€36 million before
taxes), established in 2014, is the highest ever in the sport. In addition to
his salary and multimillion-euro bonuses, much of his income derives from
endorsements; SportsPro has consequently cited him as one of the world's most
marketable athletes every year since their research began in 2010. His main
sponsor since 2006 is the sportswear company Adidas. As Barça's leading youth
prospect, he had been signed with Nike since age 14, but transferred to Adidas
after they successfully challenged their rival's claim to his image rights in
court. Over time, Messi established himself as their leading brand endorser;
from 2008, he had a long-running signature collection of Adidas F50 boots, and
in 2015, he became the first footballer to receive his own sub-brand of boots,
the Adidas Messi.

As a commercial entity, Messi's marketing brand has been based exclusively on
his talents and achievements as a player, in contrast to arguably more glamorous
players like Cristiano Ronaldo and David Beckham. At the start of his career, he
thus mainly held sponsorship contracts with companies that employ
sports-oriented marketing, such as Adidas, Pepsi, and Konami. From 2010 onwards,
concurrently with his increased achievements as a player, his marketing appeal
widened, leading to long-term endorsement deals with luxury brands Dolce &
Gabbana and Audemars Piguet. Messi is also a global brand ambassador for
Gillette, Turkish Airlines, Ooredoo, and Tata Motors, among other companies.
Additionally, Messi was the face of Konami's video game series Pro Evolution
Soccer, appearing on the covers of PES 2009, PES 2010 and PES 2011. He
subsequently signed with rival company EA Sports to become the face of their
series FIFA and has since appeared on four consecutive covers from FIFA 13 to
FIFA 16.

Messi's global popularity and influence are well documented. He was among the
Time 100, an annual list of the world's most influential people as published by
Time, in 2011 and 2012. His fanbase on the social media website Facebook is
among the largest of all public figures: within seven hours of its launch in
April 2011, his Facebook page had nearly seven million followers, and by
November 2013, he had become only the second sportsperson, after Cristiano
Ronaldo, to amass over 50 million followers. According to a 2014 survey by
sports research firm Repucom in 15 international markets, Messi was familiar to
87% of respondents around the world, of whom 78% perceived him favourably,
making him the second-most recognised player globally, behind Ronaldo, and the
most likable of all contemporary players.

Other events have illustrated Messi's presence in popular culture. A solid gold
replica of his left foot, weighing 25 kg (55 lb) and valued at $5.25 million,
went on sale in Japan in March 2013 to raise funds for victims of the 2011
Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami. A 2013 Turkish Airlines advertisement starring
Messi, in which he engages in a selfie competition with then-Los Angeles Lakers
star Kobe Bryant, was the most-watched ad on YouTube in the year of its release,
receiving 137 million views, and was subsequently voted the best advertisement
of the 2005–15 decade to commemorate YouTube's founding. World Press Photo
selected "The Final Game", a photograph of Messi facing the World Cup trophy
after Argentina's final defeat to Germany, as the best sports image of 2014.
Messi, a documentary about his life by filmmaker Álex de la Iglesia, premiered
at the Venice Film Festival in August 2014.

Since 2008, when he was 20, Messi has been in a relationship with Antonella
Roccuzzo, a fellow native of Rosario. He has known Roccuzzo since he was five
years old, as she is the cousin of his best friend since childhood, Lucas
Scaglia, who is also a football player. After keeping their relationship private
for a year, Messi first confirmed their romance in an interview in January 2009,
before going public a month later during a carnival in Sitges after the
Barcelona–Espanyol derby. He had previously been romantically linked with
Argentine models Macarena Lemos and Luciana Salazar.

Messi and Roccuzzo have two sons: Thiago (born 2012) and Mateo (born 2015). To
celebrate his partner's first pregnancy, Messi placed the ball under his shirt
after scoring in Argentina's 4–0 win against Ecuador on 2 June 2012, before
confirming the pregnancy in an interview two weeks later. Thiago was born in
Barcelona on 2 November 2012, with Messi attending the birth after being given
permission by Barcelona to miss training. He announced his son's arrival on his
Facebook page, writing, "Today I am the happiest man in the world, my son was
born and thanks to God for this gift!" Thiago's name and handprints are tattooed
on his left calf. In April 2015, Messi confirmed on Facebook that they were
expecting another child. He missed training ahead of a match against Atlético
Madrid to attend the birth of his second son, Mateo, on 11 September 2015 in
Barcelona.

Messi enjoys a close relationship with his immediate family members,
particularly his mother, Celia, whose face he has tattooed on his left shoulder.
His professional affairs are largely run as a family business: his father,
Jorge, has been his agent since he was 14, and his oldest brother, Rodrigo,
handles his daily schedule and publicity. His mother and other brother, Matías,
manage his charitable organisation, the Leo Messi Foundation, and take care of
personal and professional matters in Rosario.

Since leaving for Spain at age 13, Messi has maintained close ties to his
hometown of Rosario, even preserving his distinct Rosarino accent. He has kept
ownership of his family's old house, although it has long stood empty; he
maintains a penthouse apartment in an exclusive residential building for his
mother, as well as a family compound just outside the city. Once when he was in
training with the national team in Buenos Aires, he made a three-hour trip by
car to Rosario immediately after practice to have dinner with his family, spent
the night with them, and returned to Buenos Aires the next day in time for
practice. Messi keeps in daily contact via phone and text with a small group of
confidants in Rosario, most of whom were fellow members of "The Machine of '87"
at Newell's Old Boys. Although considered a one-club man, he has long planned to
return to Rosario to end his playing career at Newell's. He was on bad terms
with the club after his transfer to Barcelona, but by 2012 their public feud had
ended, with Newell's embracing their ties with Messi, even issuing a club
membership card to his newborn son.

Throughout his career, Messi has been involved in charitable efforts aimed at
vulnerable children, a commitment that stems in part from the medical
difficulties he faced in his own childhood. Since 2004, he has contributed his
time and finances to the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), an
organisation with which Barcelona also have a strong association. Messi has
served as a UNICEF goodwill ambassador since his appointment in March 2010,
completing his first field mission for the organisation four months later as he
travelled to Haiti to bring public awareness to the plight of the country's
children in the wake of the recent earthquake. He has since participated in
UNICEF campaigns targeting HIV prevention, education, and the social inclusion
of disabled children. To celebrate his son's first birthday, in November 2013,
Messi and Thiago were part of a publicity campaign to raise awareness of
mortality rates among disadvantaged children.

In addition to his work with UNICEF, Messi founded his own charitable
organisation, the Leo Messi Foundation, which supports access to health care,
education, and sport for children. It was established in 2007 following a visit
Messi paid to a hospital for terminally ill children in Boston, an experience
that resonated with him to the point that he decided to reinvest part of his
earnings into society. Through his foundation, Messi has awarded research
grants, financed medical training, and invested in the development of medical
centres and projects in Argentina, Spain, and elsewhere in the world. In
addition to his own fundraising activities, such as his global "Messi and
Friends" football matches, his foundation receives financial support from
various companies to which he has assigned his name in endorsement agreements,
with Adidas as their main sponsor.

Messi has also invested in youth football in Argentina: he financially supports
Sarmiento, a football club based in the Rosario neighbourhood where he was born,
committing in 2013 to the refurbishment of their facilities and the installation
of all-weather pitches, and funds the management of several youth players at
Newell's Old Boys and rival club Rosario Central, as well as at River Plate and
Boca Juniors in Buenos Aires. At Newell's Old Boys, his boyhood club, he funded
the 2012 construction of a new gymnasium and a dormitory inside the club's
stadium for their youth academy. His former youth coach at Newell's, Ernesto
Vecchio, is employed by the Leo Messi Foundation as a talent scout for young
players. On 7 June 2016, Messi won a libel case against La Razón newspaper and
was awarded €65,000 in damages, which he donated to the charity Doctors without
Borders.

Messi's financial affairs came under investigation in 2013 for suspected tax
evasion. Offshore companies in tax havens Uruguay and Belize were allegedly used
to evade €4.1 million in taxes related to sponsorship earnings between 2007 and
2009. An unrelated shell company in Panama, set up in 2012, was subsequently
identified as belonging to the Messis in the Panama Papers data leak. Messi, who
pleaded ignorance of the alleged scheme, voluntarily paid arrears of
€5.1 million in August 2013. He stood trial alongside his father on three counts
of tax evasion in May 2016. On 6 July 2016, Messi and his father were both found
guilty of tax fraud and were handed suspended 21-month prison sentences and
respectively ordered to pay €1.7 million and €1.4 million in fines.

While the District Attorney did not consider there to be motives to accuse
Messi, the state lawyer's office became the only party that requested a
punishment for him, despite his declarations that he was not aware of any of the
deals that were taking place with his money. Facing the judge, he said, "I just
played football."



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boris_Johnson

Alexander Boris de Pfeffel Johnson PC MP (born 19 June 1964), known as Boris
Johnson, is a British politician, popular historian, author, and journalist. He
has been UK Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs since July
2016 and a Member of Parliament (MP) for the Uxbridge and South Ruislip
constituency since May 2015. He had previously been an MP for the Henley
constituency from 2001 to 2008 and was later Mayor of London from 2008 to 2016.
A member of the Conservative Party, Johnson identifies as a "one-nation
conservative" and has been associated with both economically and socially
liberal policies.

Born in New York City to wealthy upper-middle class English parents, Johnson was
educated at the European School of Brussels, Ashdown House School, and Eton
College. He studied Classics at Balliol College, Oxford, where he was elected
president of the Oxford Union in 1986. Beginning his career in journalism at The
Times before being sacked for inventing a quote, he later became The Daily
Telegraph's Brussels correspondent, with his articles exerting a strong
influence on growing Eurosceptic sentiment among the British right-wing. He was
assistant editor from 1994 to 1999 before taking the editorship of The Spectator
from 1999 to 2005. Joining the Conservatives, he was elected MP for Henley in
2001, and under Michael Howard and David Cameron he was in the Shadow Cabinet.
Mostly adhering to the Conservatives' party line, he nevertheless adopted a more
socially liberal stance on issues like LGBT rights in parliamentary votes.
Making regular television appearances, writing books, and remaining active in
journalism, Johnson became one of the most conspicuous politicians in Britain.

Selected as Conservative candidate for the London mayoral election of 2008,
Johnson defeated Labour incumbent Ken Livingstone and resigned his seat in
parliament. During his first term as mayor, he banned alcohol consumption on
public transport, championed London's financial sector, and introduced the New
Routemaster buses, cycle hire scheme, and Thames cable-car. In 2012, he was
re-elected mayor, again defeating Livingstone; during his second term he oversaw
the 2012 Summer Olympics. In 2015 he was elected MP for Uxbridge and South
Ruislip, stepping down as mayor the following year. In 2016, Johnson became a
prominent figure in the successful Vote Leave campaign to withdraw the United
Kingdom from the European Union.

Johnson is a controversial figure in British politics and journalism. Supporters
have praised him as an entertaining, humorous, and popular figure with appeal
beyond traditional Conservative voters. Conversely, he has been criticised by
figures on both the left and right, accused of elitism, cronyism and laziness,
and using racist language. Johnson is the subject of several biographies and a
number of fictionalised portrayals.

Johnson was born on 19 June 1964 at a hospital on the Upper East Side of
Manhattan in New York City, to British parents. His birth was registered with
both the US authorities and the city's British Consulate and he was granted both
American and British citizenship. His father, Stanley Johnson, was then studying
economics at Columbia University. Stanley's paternal grandfather was
Circassian–Turkish journalist Ali Kemal, while his other ancestry is English and
French; he is a descendant of King George II of Great Britain. Stanley had
married Johnson's mother, Charlotte Johnson Wahl (née Fawcett), in 1963, before
they moved to the United States; she was an artist from a family of liberal
intellectuals. She was the granddaughter of Americans Elias Avery Lowe, a
palaeographer of Russian Jewish descent, and Helen Tracy Lowe-Porter, a famous
translator. In reference to his varied ancestry, Johnson has described himself
as a "one-man melting pot" – with a combination of Muslims, Jews, and Christians
as great-grandparents. Johnson was given his middle name of "Boris" after a
Russian émigré the couple had once met in Mexico.

Johnson's parents were then living in an apartment opposite the Chelsea Hotel,
although they soon embarked on a tour of Canada and New England with their
newborn. In September 1964, they returned to Britain, enabling Charlotte to
study for a degree at the University of Oxford. She lived with her son in
Summertown, Oxford and gave birth to a daughter, Rachel, in 1965. In July 1965,
the family moved to Crouch End in North London; in February 1966, they relocated
to Washington D.C., where Stanley had gained a job with the World Bank. A third
child, Leo, was born in September 1967, while Charlotte took up the painting for
which she would become publicly known. Stanley then gained employment with a
policy panel on population control, in June moving the family to Norwalk,
Connecticut.

In summer 1969, the family returned to the United Kingdom, settling into
Stanley's family farm at Nethercote, near Winsford in Exmoor. At Nethercote,
Johnson gained his first experiences with fox hunting. Stanley was regularly
absent from Nethercote, leaving Johnson to be raised largely by his mother and
au pairs. As a child, Johnson was quiet and studious, although he suffered from
severe deafness, resulting in several operations to insert grommets into his
ears. He and his siblings were encouraged to engage in high-brow activities from
a young age, with high achievement being greatly valued; Johnson's earliest
recorded ambition was to be "world king". Having few or no friends other than
their siblings, the children became very close. In autumn 1969 the family
relocated to Maida Vale, North London, where Stanley began post-doctoral
research at the London School of Economics. In 1970, Charlotte and the children
briefly returned to Nethercote, where Johnson was schooled at the Winsford
Village School, before returning to London to settle in Primrose Hill, there
being educated at Primrose Hill Primary School. In late 1971 another son, Jo
Johnson, was born to the family.

After Stanley secured employment at the European Commission, he moved his family
to Brussels in April 1973, where they settled in Uccle and Johnson became fluent
in French. Charlotte had a nervous breakdown and was hospitalised with clinical
depression, with Johnson and his siblings being sent to Ashdown House
preparatory boarding school in East Sussex in 1975. There he developed a love of
rugby and excelled at Ancient Greek and Latin; he was appalled at the teachers'
use of corporal punishment. Meanwhile, Stanley and Charlotte's relationship
broke down in December 1978 and they divorced in 1980. Charlotte moved into a
flat in Notting Hill, where her children spent much of their time with her.

Johnson was awarded a King's Scholarship to study at Eton College, the elite
independent boarding school in Eton, Berkshire. Arriving there in the autumn
term of 1977, at Eton, Johnson began using the given name "Boris" rather than
"Alex" and developed "the eccentric English persona" for which he later became
known. He also abandoned his mother's Catholicism and became an Anglican,
joining the Church of England. Although school reports complained about his
idleness, complacency, and lateness, he established himself as a popular and
well-known figure within the school. His friends were largely from the wealthy
upper middle-classes, with his best friends being Darius Guppy and Charles
Spencer, both of whom would accompany him to Oxford University and remain
friends into adulthood. Johnson excelled in English and Classics, winning prizes
in both, became secretary of the school debating society, and then editor of the
school newspaper, The Eton College Chronicle. In autumn 1981 he was admitted to
the Eton Society. Upon finishing his time at Eton, Johnson went on a gap year to
Australia, where he taught English and Latin at Geelong Grammar, an elite
independent boarding school.

Johnson won a scholarship to read Literae Humaniores, a four-year course based
in the study of Classics, at Balliol College, Oxford. Arriving at the university
in the autumn of 1983, he was part of a generation of Oxford undergraduates who
later dominated British politics and media in the early 21st century, among them
senior Conservative Party members David Cameron, William Hague, Michael Gove,
Jeremy Hunt, and Nick Boles. At the university, he played rugby for Balliol, and
associated primarily with Old Etonians, joining the Old Etonian-dominated
Bullingdon Club, an upper-class drinking society known for its acts of local
vandalism. Johnson entered into a relationship with the aristocrat Allegra
Mostyn-Owen and they became engaged while at university.

Johnson became a popular and well-known public figure at Oxford. With Guppy, he
co-edited the university's satirical magazine Tributary. In 1984, Johnson was
elected secretary of the Oxford Union, before campaigning for the position of
Union president, losing the election to Neil Sherlock. In 1986, Johnson ran for
president again, aided by undergraduate Frank Luntz; his campaign focused on
reaching out from his established upper-class support base by emphasising his
persona and downplaying his connections to the Conservatives. Hoping to court
their vote, Johnson associated with university groups affiliated with the
centrist Social Democratic Party (SDP) and Liberal Party. Luntz later alleged
that Johnson portrayed himself as an SDP supporter during the campaign, although
Johnson claims no recollection of this. Johnson won the election and was
appointed president, although his presidency was not seen as particularly
distinguished or memorable, and questions were raised regarding his competency
and seriousness. Having specialised in the study of ancient literature and
classical philosophy, Johnson graduated from Balliol College with an upper
second-class degree, but was deeply unhappy that he did not receive a first.

Johnson and Mostyn-Owen married in West Felton, Shropshire, in September 1987; a
violin piece was specially commissioned for the wedding from Hans Werner Henze.
The couple honeymooned in Egypt before settling into a flat in West Kensington,
West London. There, Johnson secured work for a management consultancy company,
L.E.K. Consulting; finding it incredibly boring, he resigned after a week.
Through family connections, in late 1987 he began work as a graduate trainee at
The Times, shadowing one of its journalists. Scandal erupted when Johnson wrote
an article on the archaeological discovery of Edward II's palace for the
newspaper. Johnson invented a quote for the article that he falsely claimed came
from the historian Colin Lucas, his own godfather. After The Times' editor
Charles Wilson learned of the deception, Johnson was sacked.

Johnson secured employment on the leader writing desk of The Daily Telegraph,
having known its editor, Max Hastings, through his Oxford University presidency.
His articles were designed to appeal to the newspaper's conservative,
middle-class, middle-aged "Middle England" readership and were known for their
unique literary style, replete with old-fashioned words and phrases, and for
regularly referring to the readership as "my friends". In spring 1989, Johnson
was appointed to the newspaper's Brussels bureau to report on the European
Commission. A strong critic of Commission President Jacques Delors, he
established himself as one of the few Eurosceptic journalists in the city. Many
of his fellow journalists based in the city were critical of his articles,
opining that they often contained untruths designed to discredit the Commission,
with The Guardian's John Palmer stating that "as a journalist he is thoroughly
irresponsible, making up stories."

Johnson biographer Andrew Gimson believed that these articles made Johnson "one
of [Euroscepticism's] most famous exponents". According to fellow biographer
Sonia Purnell, he helped to make Euroscepticism "an attractive and emotionally
resonant cause for the Right", whereas previously it had been associated with
the British Left. Johnson's articles established him as the favourite journalist
of the Conservative Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, although Thatcher's
successor, John Major, was annoyed by Johnson and spent much time attempting to
refute his claims. Johnson's articles exacerbated tensions between the
Eurosceptic and Europhile factions of the Conservative Party, and it was these
tensions which were widely viewed as a contributing factor to the party's
failure in the 1997 general election. As a result, Johnson earned the mistrust
of many party members. His writings were also a key influence on the emergence
of the right-wing Eurosceptic UK Independence Party (UKIP) in the early 1990s.

In February 1990, Allegra left Johnson and returned to London. After several
attempts to reconcile, they divorced in April 1993. He had entered a
relationship with a childhood friend, Marina Wheeler, who had moved to Brussels
in 1990. In May 1993, they married at Horsham, Sussex, and gave birth to a
daughter soon after. Johnson and his new wife settled in Islington, North
London, an area known for its left-liberal intelligentsia. Under the influence
of this milieu and his wife, Johnson moved in a more liberal direction on issues
like climate change, LGBT rights, and race relations. There, the couple had
three further children, each given the joint surname of Johnson-Wheeler, who
were sent to the local Canonbury Primary School and then private secondary
schools. Devoting much time to his children, Johnson authored a book of verse,
Perils of the Pushy Parents – A Cautionary Tale, which was published to largely
poor reviews.

Back in London, Hastings turned down Johnson's request to become a war reporter,
instead promoting him to the position of assistant editor and chief political
columnist. Johnson's column received praise for being ideologically eclectic and
uniquely written, and earned him a Commentator of the Year Award at the What the
Papers Say awards. He was also accused of bigotry; in one column he used the
words "piccannies" and "watermelon smiles" when referring to Africans, and
championed European colonialism in Uganda, while in another he referred to gay
men as "tank-topped bumboys".

Contemplating a political career, in 1993 Johnson outlined his desire to stand
as a Conservative candidate to be a Member of the European Parliament (MEP) in
the 1994 European Parliament elections. Although Major considered vetoing
Johnson's candidacy, Andrew Mitchell convinced him not to. Nevertheless, Johnson
found it impossible to find a constituency and did not stand in that election.
He subsequently turned his attention to obtaining a seat in the UK House of
Commons. After being rejected as Conservative candidate for Holborn and St.
Pancras, he was selected as the party's candidate for Clwyd South in North
Wales, a Labour Party safe seat. Spending six weeks campaigning, he attained
9,091 votes (23%) in the 1997 general election, losing to the Labour candidate.

Scandal erupted in June 1995 when a recording of a 1990 telephone conversation
between Johnson and his friend Guppy was made public. In the conversation, Guppy
revealed that his criminal activities were being investigated by News of the
World journalist Stuart Collier, and he asked Johnson to provide him with
Collier's private address, seeking to have the latter beaten up. Johnson agreed
to supply the information although he expressed concern that he would be
associated with the attack. When the phone conversation was published in 1995,
Johnson insisted that he did not ultimately give the information to Guppy;
Hastings reprimanded Johnson's behaviour but did not sack him.

Johnson was given a regular column in The Spectator, The Daily Telegraph's
sister publication; it attracted mixed reviews and was often thought rushed. In
1999, he was also given a column on new cars in the magazine GQ. His behaviour
regularly annoyed his editors; those at GQ were frustrated by the large number
of parking fines that Johnson acquired while testing cars for them, while he was
consistently late in providing his columns for The Telegraph and The Spectator,
forcing many staff to stay late to accommodate him; they related that if they
went ahead and published without his work included, he would get angry and shout
at them with expletives.

Johnson's appearance on an April 1998 episode of Have I Got News for You brought
him to a far wider audience; emphasising a bumbling upper-class persona, he was
viewed as entertaining and invited back on to later episodes, including as a
guest presenter. After these, he came to be recognised on the street by the
public, and was invited to appear on other television shows, such as Top Gear,
Parkinson, Breakfast with Frost, and Question Time.

In July 1999, Conrad Black – the then proprietor of The Daily Telegraph and The
Spectator – offered Johnson the editorship of the latter on the condition that
he abandoned his parliamentary aspirations; Johnson agreed. He brought in
contributions from figures whom he had known from his past and, while retaining
The Spectator's traditional right-wing bent, he also welcomed contributions from
leftist writers and cartoonists. Under Johnson's editorship, the circulation of
The Spectator grew by 10% to 62,000 and it began to turn a profit. His
editorship also drew criticism; some opined that under his leadership The
Spectator avoided covering serious issues and focused on trivial topics, while
colleagues became annoyed that he was regularly absent from the office and often
missed meetings and events. He gained a reputation as a poor political pundit as
a result of the incorrect political predictions that he made in the magazine,
and was also strongly criticised – including by his father-in-law Charles
Wheeler – for allowing Spectator columnist Taki Theodoracopulos to publish
racist and anti-Semitic language in the magazine.

Following the retirement of Michael Heseltine, Johnson decided to stand as the
Conservative candidate for Henley, a Conservative safe seat in Oxfordshire. The
local Conservative branch were split over Johnson's candidacy; some found him
amusing and charming, while others were critical of his flippant attitude to
serious matters and his lack of knowledge about the local area, although he was
nevertheless selected. Boosted by his television fame, Johnson stood as the
Conservative candidate for the constituency in the 2001 general election,
winning with a majority of 8,500 votes. Alongside his main Islington home,
Johnson purchased a farmhouse outside Thame in his new constituency. He
regularly attended Henley social events and wrote an occasional column for the
Henley Standard. His constituency surgeries proved popular, and he involved
himself in local campaigns to save Townlands Hospital and the local air
ambulance from closure, as well as to keep Brakspear as an independent brewer.

In becoming a Member of Parliament, Johnson broke his promise to Black that he
would not do so while editing The Spectator. Although labelling Johnson as
"ineffably duplicitous", Black did not sack him, viewing him as "a capable
editor" who "helped promote the magazine and raise its circulation". In
Parliament, Johnson was appointed to serve on a standing committee assessing the
Proceeds of Crime Bill, although he missed many of its meetings. Despite his
credentials as a public speaker, his speeches in the House of Commons were
widely deemed lacklustre and lacking in passion, with Johnson later admitting
that they were "crap". In his first four years as MP for Henley he attended just
over half of the votes in the House of Commons, although by his second term this
had declined to 45%. In most cases, he supported the Conservative party line,
only rebelling against it five times during this period, when he adopted a more
socially liberal attitude than the mainstream party; he for instance voted to
repeal Section 28 and supported the Gender Recognition Act 2004. Although
initially claiming that he would not do so, he voted in support of the
government's plans to join the US in the 2003 invasion of Iraq, and in April
2003 visited occupied Baghdad. By August 2004 he seemingly regretted his
decision by supporting calls to impeach Prime Minister Tony Blair for his role
in the 2003 invasion of Iraq and in December 2006 he described the invasion as
"a colossal mistake and misadventure"

Alongside his full-time job as an MP, he continued editing The Spectator,
writing columns for The Daily Telegraph and GQ, and making television
appearances. He also published a book, Friends, Voters, Countrymen: Jottings on
the Stump, which recounted his experiences with the 2001 election campaign. His
next publication was 2003's Lend Me Your Ears, a collection of previously
published columns and articles. In 2004 this was followed by his first novel,
Seventy-Two Virgins: A Comedy of Errors, which revolved around the life of a
Conservative MP and contained various biographical elements. Responding to
critics who argued that he was juggling too many positions, he cited prominent
Conservative politicians Winston Churchill and Benjamin Disraeli as exemplars
who combined their political and writing careers. To manage the stress he took
up jogging and cycling, and became so well known for the latter that Gimson
suggested that he was "perhaps the most famous cyclist in Britain".

Following William Hague's resignation as Conservative leader, Johnson used The
Spectator to support the candidacy of the only pro-EU figure, Kenneth Clarke.
Johnson argued that Clarke was the only candidate capable of winning a general
election, however Iain Duncan Smith was selected. Johnson had a strained
relationship with Duncan Smith, with The Spectator becoming very critical of the
latter's party leadership. Duncan Smith was removed from his position in
November 2003 and replaced by Michael Howard; Howard deemed Johnson to be the
most popular Conservative politician with the electorate and appointed him
vice-chairman of the party, responsible for overseeing its electoral campaign.
In his shadow cabinet reshuffle of May 2004, Howard appointed Johnson to the
position of shadow arts minister.

In August 2004, Johnson was one of several MPs who supported the commencement of
impeachment procedures against Prime Minister Tony Blair for "high crimes and
misdemeanours" in relation to his role in the 2003 invasion of Iraq. However,
the impeachment motion was quickly defeated. In October 2004 Howard ordered
Johnson to go to Liverpool and issue a public apology for an article anonymously
authored by Simon Heffer that Johnson had published in The Spectator; in the
article, Heffer claimed that the crowds at the Hillsborough disaster had
contributed towards the incident and that Liverpool had a predilection for
reliance on the welfare state.

In November 2004, the British tabloids revealed that since 2000, Johnson had
been having an affair with Spectator columnist Petronella Wyatt, resulting in
two terminated pregnancies. Johnson initially dismissed the claims as "piffle".
After the allegations were proven, Howard asked Johnson to resign from his
position as vice-chairman and shadow arts minister, not because of the affair
but because he had publicly lied about it. Johnson refused, at which point
Howard sacked him from those positions. The scandal was satirised by The
Spectator's theatre critics Toby Young and Lloyd Evans in a play, Who's the
Daddy?, performed at Islington's King's Head Theatre in July 2005; the play
upset Johnson. In April 2006, the News of the World alleged that Johnson was
having an affair with the journalist Anna Fazackerley; both Fazackerley and
Johnson refused to comment although the former stepped down from her job and was
subsequently employed by Johnson. That month, he attracted further public
attention for taking part in a charity football match between former
professional footballers and celebrities from England and Germany, in which he
rugby tackled Maurizio Gaudino. In September 2006 his comparison between the
frequently changing leadership of the Conservatives to cannibalism in Papua New
Guinea drew criticism from the latter country's high commission.

In the 2005 general election, Johnson was re-elected MP for Henley, increasing
his majority to 12,793. Following Labour's victory in the election, Howard stood
down as Conservative leader, with Johnson backing David Cameron as his
successor. After being successfully selected, Cameron appointed Johnson as the
shadow higher education minister, acknowledging his popularity among students.
Johnson's main interest was in streamlining university funding, as part of which
he supported Labour's proposed top-up fees. In September 2006, his image was
used in 'Boris needs you' and 'I Love Boris' material to promote the
Conservative Party's image during Freshers' Week in universities. In 2006
Johnson campaigned to become Rector of Edinburgh University, but his support for
top-up fees damaged his campaign and he ultimately came third, losing to Mark
Ballard.

In 2005, The Spectator's new chief executive, Andrew Neil, removed Johnson from
the editorship of the magazine. With his reduction of earnings, Johnson
convinced The Daily Telegraph to raise his annual fee from £200,000 to £250,000,
averaging at £5,000 per column, each of which took up around an hour and a half
of his time. He presented a popular history television show, The Dream of Rome,
for Tiger Aspect; the show was broadcast in January 2006 and a book followed in
February. Through his own production company, he then produced a sequel, After
Rome, which focused on early Islamic history. As a result of his various
activities, in 2007 he earned £540,000, making him the UK's third highest
earning MP that year.

In March 2007, Johnson suggested that he stand for the position of Mayor of
London in the 2008 mayoral election. His candidacy was not initially taken
seriously within the Conservative Party, who favoured Nick Boles as its
candidate. However, after Boles withdrew, Johnson gained the support of Cameron,
as well as the London Evening Standard newspaper. In July, he officially
announced his candidacy, and was selected as Conservative candidate in September
after gaining 79% of the vote in a public London-wide primary. The Conservatives
hired election strategist Lynton Crosby to run Johnson's campaign, which was
primarily funded by sympathetic individuals in London's financial sector.
Johnson's campaign focused on reducing youth crime, making public transport
safer, and replacing the articulated buses with an updated version of the AEC
Routemaster. It also targeted the Conservative-leaning suburbs of outer London,
hoping to capitalise on a perception that they had been overlooked by a Labour
Mayoralty that had paid more attention to inner London. His campaign capitalised
on his popularity, even among those who opposed his policies, with opponents
complaining that a common attitude among voters was that "I'm voting for Boris
because he is a laugh".

Labour incumbent Ken Livingstone took Johnson seriously, referring to him as
"the most formidable opponent I will face in my political career." Livingstone's
campaign portrayed Johnson as both an out-of-touch toff and a bigot, as
evidenced by racist and homophobic language that he had used in his column;
Johnson responded that these quotes had been taken out of context and were meant
as satire. Johnson insisted that he was not a bigot, declaring that "I'm
absolutely 100% anti-racist; I despise and loath racism". Publicly emphasising
his Turkish ancestry, he went contrary to Conservative policy by declaring his
support for an earned amnesty for illegal immigrants. However, the allegations
were exacerbated when the far-right British National Party (BNP) urged its
supporters to give their second preference votes to Johnson; he responded by
"utterly and unreservedly" condemning the BNP. Controversy was also generated
during the campaign when Johnson admitted that as a student he had used cannabis
and cocaine.

The election took place in May 2008, and witnessed a turnout of approximately
45% of eligible voters, with Johnson receiving 43.2% and Livingstone 37% of
first-preference votes; when second-preference votes were added, Johnson proved
victorious with 53.2% to Livingstone's 46.8%. Johnson benefited from a large
voter turnout in Conservative strongholds, in particular Bexley and Bromley.
Johnson thus won the largest personal electoral mandate in the UK. Following his
victory, he praised Livingstone as a "very considerable public servant" and
added that he hoped to "discover a way in which the mayoralty can continue to
benefit from your transparent love of London". He also announced that, as a
result of his victory, he would resign as Member of Parliament for Henley,
generating some anger from Henley party members and constituents who felt that
Johnson was abandoning them for London.

Settling into the Mayoral offices at City Hall, Johnson's first official
engagement was an appearance at the Sikh celebrations for Vaisakhi in Trafalgar
Square. His first policy initiative, issued that month, was a ban on drinking
alcohol on public transport. He received criticism during the early weeks of his
administration, largely because he was late to two official functions in his
first week on the job, and because after three weeks he embarked on a holiday to
Turkey. In July 2008 Johnson visited the closing ceremony of the 2008 Summer
Olympics in Beijing, there offending his Chinese hosts with his attire. Rather
than bringing a team of assistants with him to the job as Livingstone had done,
Johnson built his team over the following six months. Those in City Hall who
were deemed too closely allied to Livingstone's administration had their
employment terminated. Johnson appointed Tim Parker to be first deputy mayor,
but after Parker began taking increasing control at City Hall and insisted that
all staff report directly to him, Johnson sacked him. As a result of these
problems, many in the Conservative Party initially distanced themselves from
Johnson's administration, fearing that it would be counter-productive to
achieving a Conservative victory in the 2010 general election.

During the electoral campaign, Johnson had confided to Brian Paddick that he was
unsure how he would retain his current lifestyle while relying upon the Mayoral
salary of £140,000 a year. To resolve this problem, he agreed to continue his
Telegraph column alongside his Mayoral job, thus earning a further £250,000 a
year. His team believed that this would cause controversy, and made him promise
to donate a fifth of his Telegraph fee to a charitable cause providing bursaries
for students. Johnson resented this, and ultimately did not pay a full fifth.
Controversy erupted when he was questioned about his Telegraph fee on BBC's
HARDtalk; here, he referred to the £250,000 as "chicken feed", something that
was widely condemned given that this was roughly ten times the average yearly
wage for a British worker.

Johnson made no major changes to the mayoral system as developed by Livingstone.
He did, however, reverse a number of measures implemented by Livingstone's
administration, ending the city's oil deal with Venezuela, abolishing The
Londoner newsletter, and scrapping the half yearly inspections of black cabs,
although the latter were reinstated three years later. Abolishing the western
wing of the congestion charging zone, he cancelled plans to increase the
congestion charge for four-wheel drives. He was subsequently accused of failing
to publish an independent report on air pollution commissioned by the Greater
London authority. The report, available in 2013, showed London had been in
breach of levels of diesel nitrogen dioxide levels since 2010 in areas affecting
433 primary schools. Poor areas, such as Newham, Hackney, and Tower Hamlets,
were on average more polluted than more affluent areas and nearly 6,000
Londoners die annually from nitrogen dioxide levels above EU standards.

He retained Livingstone projects like Crossrail and the 2012 Olympic Games, but
was accused of trying to take credit for them. He introduced a public bicycle
scheme which had been mooted by Livingstone's administration; colloquially known
as "Boris Bikes", the partly privately financed system cost £140 million and was
a significant financial loss although it proved popular. Despite Johnson's
support of cycling in London – and his much publicised identity as a cyclist
himself – his administration was criticised by some cycling groups who argued
that he had failed to make the city's roads safer for cyclists. As per his
election pledge, he also commissioned the development of the New Routemaster
buses for central London. He also ordered the construction of a cable-car system
that crossed the River Thames between Greenwich Peninsula and the Royal Docks.
At the beginning of his tenure as Mayor, Johnson announced plans to extend Pay
As You Go Oyster cards to national rail services in London One of the pledges in
Johnson's election manifesto was to retain Tube ticket offices, in opposition to
Livingstone's proposal to close up to 40 London Underground ticket offices. On 2
July 2008 the Mayor's office announced that the closure plan was to be abandoned
and that offices would remain open. On 21 November 2013, Transport for London
announced that all London Underground ticket offices would close by 2015. In
financing these projects, Johnson's administration borrowed £100 million, while
public transport fares were increased by 50%.

Johnson assumed control at City Hall on 4 May 2008. He appointed Richard Barnes
as his Deputy Mayor on 6 May 2008, as well as appointing the following to newly
devolved offices; Ian Clement as Deputy Mayor for Government Relations, Kit
Malthouse as Deputy Mayor for Policing and Ray Lewis as Deputy Mayor for Young
People. The Mayor also appointed Munira Mirza as his cultural adviser and Nick
Boles, the founder of Policy Exchange, as Chief of Staff. Sir Simon Milton
became Deputy Mayor for Policy and Planning, as well as Chief of Staff.
Political opponents questioned Johnson's judgement when Ray Lewis resigned on 4
July 2008, shortly after taking up his post, following allegations of financial
misconduct during his prior career as a Church of England priest and
inappropriate behaviour in respect of a false claim to have been appointed as a
magistrate.

During the first term of his mayoralty, Johnson was perceived as having moved
leftward on certain issues, for instance by supporting the London Living Wage
and the idea of an amnesty for illegal migrants. He tried placating critics who
had deemed him a bigot by appearing at London's gay pride parade and praising
ethnic minority newspapers. In 2012, he banned London buses from displaying the
adverts of Core Issues Trust, a Christian group, which compared being gay to an
illness. In August 2008, Johnson broke from the traditional protocol of those in
public office not publicly commenting on other nations' elections by endorsing
Barack Obama for the presidency of the United States.

Johnson appointed himself Chairman of the Metropolitan Police Authority (MPA),
and in October 2008 successfully pushed for the resignation of Metropolitan
Police Commissioner Ian Blair after the latter was criticised for allegedly
handing contracts to friends and for his handling of the death of Jean Charles
de Menezes. This earned Johnson great respect among Conservatives, who
interpreted it as his first act of strength and assertiveness. Although
resigning as MPA chairman in January 2010, throughout his mayoralty Johnson was
highly supportive of the Metropolitan Police, particularly during the
controversy surrounding the death of Ian Tomlinson. Overall crime in London fell
during his administration, although his claim that serious youth crime had
decreased was shown to be false, as it had increased. Similarly, his claim that
Metropolitan Police numbers had increased was also shown to be incorrect, as the
city's police force had decreased in size under his administration, in line with
the rest of the country. He was also criticised for his response to the 2011
London riots; holidaying with his family in British Columbia when the rioting
broke out, he did not immediately return to London, only returning 48 hours
after it had begun and addressing Londoners 60 hours after. Upon visiting
shopkeepers and residents affected by the riots in Clapham, he was booed and
jeered away by some elements within the crowds.

Johnson championed London's financial sector and denounced what he saw as
"banker bashing" following the financial crisis of 2007–08, condemning the
anti-capitalist Occupy London movement that appeared in 2011. He spent much time
with those involved in the financial services, and criticised the government's
50p tax rate for higher earners. He collected donations from the city's wealthy
for a charitable enterprise, the Mayor's Fund, which he had established to aid
disadvantaged youths; although initially announcing that it would raise
£100 million, by 2010 it had only spent £1.5 million. He also retained extensive
personal contacts throughout the British media, which resulted in widespread
favourable press coverage of his administration. In turn he remained largely
supportive of his friends in the media, among them Rupert Murdoch, during the
News International phone hacking scandal.

The formation of the Forensic Audit Panel was announced on 8 May 2008. The Panel
is tasked with monitoring and investigating financial management at the London
Development Agency and the Greater London Authority. Johnson's announcement was
criticised by Labour for the perceived politicisation of this nominally
independent panel, who asked if the appointment of key Johnson allies to the
panel – "to dig dirt on Ken Livingstone" – was "an appropriate use of public
funds". The head of the panel, Patience Wheatcroft is married to a Conservative
councillor and three of the four remaining panel members also have close links
to the Conservatives: Stephen Greenhalgh (Conservative Leader of Hammersmith and
Fulham Council), Patrick Frederick (Chairman of Conservative Business Relations
for South East England and Southern London) and Edward Lister (Conservative
Leader of Wandsworth Council).

During his first administration, Johnson was embroiled in several personal
scandals. After moving to a new house in Islington, he built a shed on his
balcony without obtaining planning permission; after neighbours complained, he
dismantled the shed. The press also accused him of having an affair with Helen
Macintyre and of fathering her child, allegations that he did not deny.
Controversy was generated when Johnson was accused of warning the MP Damian
Green that police were planning to arrest him; Johnson denied the claims and did
not face criminal charges under the Criminal Justice Act. He was accused of
cronyism, in particular for appointing Veronica Wadley, a former Evening
Standard editor who had supported him, as the chair of London's Arts Council
when she was widely regarded as not being the best candidate for the position.
He was caught up in the parliamentary expenses scandal and accused of excessive
personal spending on taxi journeys, with his deputy mayor Ian Clement having
been found to have misused a City Hall credit card, resulting in his
resignation. Johnson remained a popular figure in London with a strong celebrity
status. In 2009, he rescued a woman, Franny Armstrong, from anti-social
teenagers who had threatened her while he was cycling past.

Up for re-election in 2012, Johnson again hired Crosby to orchestrate his
campaign. Before the election, Johnson published Johnson's Life of London, a
work of popular history which the historian A. N. Wilson characterised as a
"coded plea" for votes. Polls suggested that while Livingstone's approach to
transport was preferred, voters in London placed greater trust in Johnson over
issues of crime and the economy. During the 2012 Mayoral election, Johnson
sought re-election, while Livingstone was again selected as the Labour
candidate. Johnson's campaign emphasised the accusation that Livingstone was
guilty of tax evasion, for which Livingstone called Johnson a "bare-faced liar".
The political scientist Andrew Crines believed that Livingstone's campaign
focused on criticising Johnson rather than presenting an alternate and
progressive vision of London's future. In 2012, he was re-elected as Mayor,
again defeating Livingstone.

London was successful in its bid to host the 2012 Summer Olympics while Ken
Livingstone was still Mayor in 2005. Johnson's role in the proceedings was to be
the co-chair of an Olympic board which oversaw the Games. Two of his actions
subsequent to taking on this role were to improve the transport around London by
making more tickets available and laying on more buses around the capital during
the busy period, when thousands of spectators were temporary visitors in London,
and also to allow shops and supermarkets to have longer opening hours on
Sundays. However Johnson was accused of covering up pollution ahead of the games
by deploying dust suppressants to remove air particulates near monitoring
stations. In November 2013, Johnson announced major changes to the operation of
London Underground, including the extension of Tube operating hours to run
through the night at weekends. The announcement also revealed that all staffed
Underground ticket offices would be closed with the aim of saving over
£40 million a year, with automated ticketing systems provided instead.

In February 2012 he criticised London's Saint Patrick's Day gala dinner
celebrations, linking them to Sinn Féin and branding the event "Lefty crap", for
which he later apologised.

In February 2013, during a London Assembly meeting following the publication of
the 2014 budget for London, Johnson was ejected from the meeting following a
vote and on the grounds that his Deputy Victoria Borwick had left the chamber.
Upon realising that the vote meant that he would not be questioned on the
budget, Johnson referred to his political opponents as "great supine
protoplasmic invertebrate jellies".

Johnson attended the launch of the World Islamic Economic Forum in London in
July 2013, where he answered questions alongside Malaysian Prime Minister Najib
Razak. He joked that Malaysian women attended university in order to find
husbands, causing some offence among female attendees.

In 2014, Johnson pushed his biography of Churchill, The Churchill Factor, with
media emphasising how Johnson repeatedly compared himself to Churchill
throughout.

In 2016, three German-made water cannon, which he had bought for the
Metropolitan Police without waiting for clearance for use by Theresa May, were
sold by his successor, with the funds going to youth services.

Johnson initially denied that he would return to the House of Commons while
remaining Mayor. However, after much media speculation, in August 2014 he sought
selection as the Conservative candidate for the safe seat of Uxbridge and South
Ruislip at the 2015 general election, being selected as the party's candidate in
September. The United Kingdom general election, 2015 took place on 7 May and
Johnson was elected. There was much speculation that he had returned to
Parliament because he wanted to replace Cameron as Conservative leader and Prime
Minister.

Johnson became the centre of media interest in early 2016 when he refused to
clarify his support for Brexit. In February 2016 he endorsed Vote Leave in the
"Out" campaign for the United Kingdom European Union membership referendum,
2016. He labelled Cameron's fears on the matter as "greatly over exaggerated".
Following this announcement, which was interpreted by financial markets as
making Brexit more probable, the pound sterling slumped by nearly 2% to its
lowest level since March 2009. When Obama urged the UK to remain in the EU,
Johnson alleged that the President was motivated by anti-British sentiment
caused by his Kenyan ancestry. The comments were condemned as racist and
unacceptable by several Labour and Liberal Democratic politicians, and a King's
College London student society revoked a speaking invitation to him on the basis
of it. Conversely, his comments were defended by both UK Independence Party
(UKIP) leader Nigel Farage and the Conservative Iain Duncan Smith. On the 22
June 2016, the day before the referendum vote, Johnson declared 23 June could be
"Britain's independence day" in a televised debate in front of a 6000-member
audience at Wembley Arena. David Cameron, British Prime Minister at the time,
specifically addressed Johnson's claim, publicly stating; “the idea that our
country isn’t independent is nonsense. This whole debate demonstrates our
sovereignty.”

Following the success of the "Leave" campaign in the referendum, Cameron
announced his resignation, and Johnson was widely regarded as the front-runner
in the election of his replacement, both as Conservative leader and as Prime
Minister. In what was anticipated to be the launch of his leadership campaign,
Johnson declared he would not campaign for leader, as he did not believe he
could provide the necessary unity or leadership for the party. This followed the
surprise launch of a leadership campaign by Michael Gove, previously seen as a
key ally of the Johnson campaign, who said (earlier that morning) that he had
reluctantly come to the conclusion that Johnson "cannot provide the leadership
or build the team for the task ahead." The Telegraph stated that Gove's actions
in undermining Johnson's leadership aspirations constituted "the most
spectacular political assassination in a generation." Meanwhile, Michael
Heseltine stated that Johnson had "ripped apart" the Conservative Party and that
"He's created the greatest constitutional crisis of modern times. He knocked
billions off the value of the nation's savings". Johnson then endorsed Andrea
Leadsom as a candidate for the Conservative leadership, but she dropped out of
the race a week later.

Following Theresa May's victory in the leadership contest and subsequent
appointment as Prime Minister, Johnson was appointed Secretary of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs on 13 July 2016. Johnson's appointment was
criticised by some journalists and foreign politicians due to his history of
controversial statements about other countries and their leaders. Former Prime
Minister of Sweden Carl Bildt said "I wish it was a joke", and France's foreign
minister Jean-Marc Ayrault stated: "I am not at all worried about Boris Johnson,
but ... during the campaign he lied a lot to the British people and now it is he
who has his back against the wall" as the UK tries to negotiate its future
relationship with EU. Conversely, former Prime Minister of Australia Tony Abbott
welcomed the appointment and called him "a friend of Australia". A senior
official in the US government suggested that Johnson's appointment would push
the US further towards ties with Germany at the expense of the Special
Relationship with the UK.

Several analysts described the appointment as a possible tactic by May to weaken
Johnson politically: the new positions of "Brexit Secretary" and International
Trade Secretary leave the Foreign Secretary as a figurehead with few powers, and
the appointment would ensure that Johnson would often be out of the country and
unable to organise a rebel coalition, while also forcing him to take
responsibility for any problems caused by withdrawal from the EU. In August
2016, May called on "feuding ministers" Johnson and Liam Fox to 'stop playing
games' after Fox wrote to Johnson saying that British trade couldn't flourish
whilst future policy responsibility remained in Johnson's department. His
recorded message supporting Change Britain was perceived by The Guardian as
putting pressure on May to speed up the exit process though the paper also
recorded the fury of former health minister Anna Soubry at the absence of the
central "£350m-a-week bonanza for the NHS" pledge -a pledge she had previously
described as a lie. In an article very critical of Leave campaign figures, which
noted his video and his lack of support for May, the Washington Post called him
"bombastic".

Johnson supported the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen and refused to
block UK arms sales to Saudi Arabia, saying there is no clear evidence of
breaches of international humanitarian law by Saudi Arabia in the war in Yemen.
In September 2016, he was accused of blocking the UN inquiry into Saudi war
crimes in Yemen.

Johnson pledged to help Turkey join the European Union in "any way possible" and
expressed Britain’s continued support for the elected Turkish government.

Upon meeting with Australian Foreign Minister, Julie Bishop in late September
2016, Johnson reiterated his support for negotiating increased visa access
between the United Kingdom and Australia, declaring it "odd" that Australians
struggled harder to settle in Britain than European nations such as Slovakia. In
January 2017 the former government minister Lord Wallace of Saltaire said that
Johnson's work on Brexit had left civil servants "in despair" and that he was
"alienating other EU foreign ministers". The Foreign Office defended Johnson.

In December 2016, at the Med 2 conference in Rome, Johnson said: "There are
politicians who are twisting and abusing religion and different strains of the
same religion in order to further their own political objectives. That's one of
the biggest political problems in the whole region...That's why you've got the
Saudis, Iran, everybody, moving in and puppeteering and playing proxy wars."
These comments were interpreted as a diplomatic gaffe in Britain as Saudi Arabia
is an ally of Britain and the biggest buyer of British arms. British prime
minister Theresa May said that the foreign minister's comments did not represent
the government's view. Other Conservatives however, defended Johnson. Scottish
Conservative Party leader Ruth Davidson said: "I think Boris Johnson was
absolutely right about what he said about proxy wars and about Iran. And I agree
with his analysis. Now, that might not be the position of the UK Government but
guess what - I am not in the UK Government and I think he was right." Later that
month, Johnson visited Bahrain, met Saudi leaders and praised Saudi Arabia,
saying it was "securing itself from bombardment by the Hootis" in Yemen.

Ideologically, Johnson has described himself as a "One-Nation Tory". Academic
Tony Travers of the London School of Economics described Johnson as "a fairly
classic—that is, small-state—mildly eurosceptic Conservative" who like his
contemporaries Cameron and Osborne also embraced "modern social liberalism". The
Guardian agreed that while Mayor, Johnson had blended economic and social
liberalism, with The Economist claiming that in doing so Johnson "transcends his
Tory identity" and adopts a more libertarian perspective. Stuart Reid, Johnson's
colleague at The Spectator, described the latter's views as being those of a
"liberal libertarian". Johnson's biographer and friend Andrew Gimson noted that
while "in economic and social matters, [Johnson] is a genuine liberal", he
retains a "Tory element" to his personality through his "love of existing
institutions, and a recognition of the inevitability of hierarchy".

Stuart Wilks-Heeg, executive director of Democratic Audit, noted that "Boris is
politically nimble", while biographer Sonia Purnell stated that Johnson
regularly changed his opinion on political issues, commenting on what she
perceived to be "an ideological emptiness beneath the staunch Tory exterior."
She later referred to his "opportunistic—some might say pragmatic—approach to
politics". Former Mayor Ken Livingstone claimed in an interview with the New
Statesman that while he had once feared Johnson as "the most hardline right-wing
ideologue since Thatcher", over the course of Johnson's mayoralty he had instead
concluded that he was "a fairly lazy tosser who just wants to be there" while
doing very little work. He has sometimes been described as a "populist" and a
"nationalist".

Although Johnson became widely known for his strongly Eurosceptic articles in
The Daily Telegraph, many of his close associates have believed this to be an
opportunistic ruse, expressing the view that he is not a genuine Eurosceptic,
with some suggesting that he might be sympathetic to the cause of European
federalism. In 2012, for instance, he welcomed the prospect of Turkey's entry
into the EU. Purnell stated that he is "neither truly anti-European nor a Little
Englander".

Purnell has noted that Johnson "is nothing if not an elitist". In an article
titled "Long Live Elitism", Johnson stated that "without elites and elitism man
would still be in his caves." Purnell believed that it was the influence of
Johnson's maternal family, the left-wing Fawcetts, that led to him developing "a
genuine abhorrence of racial discrimination".

Widely known simply as "Boris", Johnson has attracted a variety of nicknames,
including "BoJo", a portmanteau of his forename and surname. Biographer Sonia
Purnell described his public persona as "brand Boris", noting that he developed
it while at Oxford University. Max Hastings referred to this public image as a
"façade resembling that of P. G. Wodehouse's Gussie Fink-Nottle, allied to wit,
charm, brilliance and startling flashes of instability", while political
scientist Andrew Crines stated that Johnson had created "the character of a
likable and trustworthy individual with strong intellectual capital". Private
Eye editor Ian Hislop has defined him as "Beano Boris" due to his perceived
comical nature, saying: "He's our Berlusconi ... He's the only feel-good
politician we have, everyone else is too busy being responsible."

Johnson purposely cultivates a "semi-shambolic look", for instance by
specifically ruffling his hair in a certain way for when he makes public
appearances. Purnell described him as "a manic self-promoter" who filled his
life with "fun and jokes". Described by Crines as "a joker", Johnson has stated
that "humour is a utensil that you can use to sugar the pill and to get
important points across." Purnell noted that colleagues regularly expressed the
view that Johnson used people to advance his own interests, with Gimson noting
that Johnson was "one of the great flatterers of our times". Purnell noted that
he deflected serious questions using "a little humour and a good deal of
bravado". According to Gimson, Johnson was "a humane man" who "could also be
staggeringly inconsiderate of others" when focusing upon his own interests.
Gimson also noted that Johnson has "an excessive desire to be liked".

According to Purnell, "[Johnson] is blessed with immense charisma, wit, sex
appeal and celebrity gold dust; he is also recognised and loved by
millions—although perhaps less so by many who have had to work closely with him
(let alone depend on him). Resourceful, cunning and strategic, he can pull off
serious political coups when the greater good happens to coincide with his
personal advantage but these aspirations are rarely backed up by concrete
achievements, or even detailed plans." Furthermore, Purnell noted that Johnson
was a "highly evasive figure" when it came to his personal life, who remained
detached from others and who had very few if any intimate friends. Among friends
and family, Johnson is known as "Al" rather than "Boris". Gimson stated that
Johnson "has very bad manners. He tends to be late, does not care about being
late, and dresses without much care". Highly ambitious and very competitive,
Gimson noted that Johnson was born "to wage a ceaseless struggle for supremacy".
He would be particularly angered with those he thought insulted aspects of his
personal life; for instance, when an article in The Telegraph upset Johnson he
e-mailed commissioning editor Sam Leith with the simple message "Fuck off and
die." Thus, Purnell notes, Johnson hides his ruthlessness "using bumbling,
self-deprecation or humour", adding that he was a fan of "laddish banter and
crude sexual references".

Johnson is a fluent speaker of French and Italian, has a good grasp of German
and Spanish, and is a lover of Latin, frequently using classical references in
his newspaper columns and speeches.

Stating that in the past he has "often smoked cannabis", Johnson is in favour of
legalising medical marijuana.

Johnson is a controversial figure in British politics and journalism. Purnell
described Johnson as "the most unconventional, yet compelling politician of the
post-Blair era" in British politics. She added that in Britain, he was "beloved
by millions and recognised by all". Giles Edwards and Jonathan Isaby commented
that Johnson appealed to "a broad cross-section of the public", with his friends
characterising him as a "Heineken Tory" who can appeal to voters that other
Conservatives cannot. Gimson expressed the view that "people love him because he
makes them laugh", noting that he had become "the darling of the Tory rank and
file".

Purnell recognised that during the 2008 mayoral election, he was "polarising
opinions to the extreme", with critics viewing him as "variously evil, a clown,
a racist and a bigot". Writing in The Guardian, journalist Polly Toynbee for
instance referred to him as "jester, toff, self-absorbed sociopath and serial
liar", while Labour politician Hazel Blears called him "a nasty right-wing
elitist, with odious views and criminal friends". More recently, Johnson has
evoked comparisons with United States President-elect Donald Trump. In June
2016, Nick Clegg described him as "like Donald Trump with a thesaurus", while
fellow Conservative MP Kenneth Clarke described him as a "nicer Donald Trump"
and EU official Martin Selmayr described the potential election of Johnson and
Trump to the leadership of their respective countries as a "horror scenario".
However, Johnson has chosen to distance himself from Trump, criticising him on
numerous occasions.

Johnson had dual citizenship in both the United Kingdom and the United States,
since he was born in New York City to English parents. In 2014, Johnson
acknowledged he was disputing a demand for capital gains tax from the US tax
authorities, which ultimately he paid. In February 2015, he announced his
intention to give up US citizenship to prove his loyalty to the UK. In 2016, he
renounced his US citizenship.

Johnson is the eldest of the four children of Stanley Johnson, a former
Conservative Member of the European Parliament and employee of the European
Commission and World Bank, and the painter Charlotte Johnson Wahl (née Fawcett),
the daughter of Sir James Fawcett, a barrister and president of the European
Commission of Human Rights. His younger siblings are Rachel Johnson, a writer
and journalist; Leo Johnson, a partner specialising in sustainability at
accountancy firm PricewaterhouseCoopers; and Jo Johnson, Minister of State for
Universities and Science and Conservative MP for Orpington. His stepfather was
the American academic Nicholas Wahl.[citation needed] Johnson's stepmother,
Jenny, the second wife of his father Stanley, is the stepdaughter of Teddy
Sieff, the former chairman of Marks & Spencer.

In 1987, he married Allegra Mostyn-Owen, the daughter of the art historian
William Mostyn-Owen and the Italian writer Gaia Servadio; the marriage was
dissolved in 1993. Later that year, he married Marina Wheeler, a barrister and
daughter of journalist and broadcaster Sir Charles Wheeler and his wife, Dip
Singh. The Wheeler and Johnson families have known each other for decades, and
Marina Wheeler was at the European School in Brussels at the same time as her
future husband. They have four children: two daughters, Lara and Cassia, and two
sons, Milo and Theodore. Johnson and his family live in Islington, North London.

In 2009, Johnson fathered a daughter with Helen MacIntyre, an arts consultant.
Her existence was the subject of legal action in 2013 with the Court of Appeal
quashing an injunction seeking to ban reporting of her existence; the judge
ruled that the public had a right to know about Johnson's "reckless" behaviour.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Union

The European Union (EU) is a political and economic union of 28 member states
that are located primarily in Europe. It has an area of 4,475,757 km2
(1,728,099 sq mi), and an estimated population of over 510 million. The EU has
developed an internal single market through a standardised system of laws that
apply in all member states. EU policies aim to ensure the free movement of
people, goods, services, and capital within the internal market, enact
legislation in justice and home affairs, and maintain common policies on trade,
agriculture, fisheries, and regional development. Within the Schengen Area,
passport controls have been abolished. A monetary union was established in 1999
and came into full force in 2002, and is composed of 19 EU member states which
use the euro currency.

The EU operates through a hybrid system of supranational and intergovernmental
decision-making. The seven principal decision-making bodies—known as the
institutions of the European Union—are the European Council, the Council of the
European Union, the European Parliament, the European Commission, the Court of
Justice of the European Union, the European Central Bank, and the European Court
of Auditors.

The EU traces its origins from the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) and
the European Economic Community (EEC), formed by the Inner Six countries in 1951
and 1958, respectively. The community and its successors have grown in size by
the accession of new member states and in power by the addition of policy areas
to its remit. The Maastricht Treaty established the European Union in 1993 and
introduced European citizenship. The latest major amendment to the
constitutional basis of the EU, the Treaty of Lisbon, came into force in 2009.

Covering 7.3% of the world population, the EU in 2016 generated a nominal gross
domestic product (GDP) of 16.477 trillion US dollars, constituting approximately
22.2% of global nominal GDP and 16.9% when measured in terms of purchasing power
parity. Additionally, 26 out of 28 EU countries have a very high Human
Development Index, according to the United Nations Development Programme. In
2012, the EU was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. Through the Common Foreign and
Security Policy, the EU has developed a role in external relations and defence.
The union maintains permanent diplomatic missions throughout the world and
represents itself at the United Nations, the World Trade Organization, the G7,
and the G-20. Because of its global influence, the European Union has been
described as an emerging superpower.

After World War II, European integration was seen as an antidote to the extreme
nationalism which had devastated the continent. The 1948 Hague Congress was a
pivotal moment in European federal history, as it led to the creation of the
European Movement International and of the College of Europe, where Europe's
future leaders would live and study together. 1952 saw the creation of the
European Coal and Steel Community, which was declared to be "a first step in the
federation of Europe." The supporters of the Community included Alcide De
Gasperi, Jean Monnet, Robert Schuman, and Paul-Henri Spaak.

In 1957, Belgium, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and West Germany
signed the Treaty of Rome, which created the European Economic Community (EEC)
and established a customs union. They also signed another pact creating the
European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom) for co-operation in developing
nuclear energy. Both treaties came into force in 1958.

The EEC and Euratom were created separately from the ECSC, although they shared
the same courts and the Common Assembly. The EEC was headed by Walter Hallstein
(Hallstein Commission) and Euratom was headed by Louis Armand (Armand
Commission) and then Étienne Hirsch. Euratom was to integrate sectors in nuclear
energy while the EEC would develop a customs union among members.

During the 1960s, tensions began to show, with France seeking to limit
supranational power. Nevertheless, in 1965 an agreement was reached and on 1
July 1967 the Merger Treaty created a single set of institutions for the three
communities, which were collectively referred to as the European Communities.
Jean Rey presided over the first merged Commission (Rey Commission).

In 1973, the Communities enlarged to include Denmark (including Greenland, which
later left the Community in 1985, following a dispute over fishing rights),
Ireland, and the United Kingdom. Norway had negotiated to join at the same time,
but Norwegian voters rejected membership in a referendum. In 1979, the first
direct elections to the European Parliament were held.

Greece joined in 1981, Portugal and Spain following in 1986. In 1985, the
Schengen Agreement paved the way for the creation of open borders without
passport controls between most member states and some non-member states. In
1986, the European flag began to be used by the Community and the Single
European Act was signed.

In 1990, after the fall of the Eastern Bloc, the former East Germany became part
of the Community as part of a reunified Germany. With further enlargement
planned to include the former communist states of Central and Eastern Europe, as
well as Cyprus and Malta, the Copenhagen criteria for candidate members to join
the EU were agreed upon in June 1993.

The European Union was formally established when the Maastricht Treaty—whose
main architects were Helmut Kohl and François Mitterrand—came into force on 1
November 1993. The treaty also gave the name European Community to the EEC, even
if it was referred as such before the treaty. In 1995, Austria, Finland, and
Sweden joined the EU.

In 2002, euro banknotes and coins replaced national currencies in 12 of the
member states. Since then, the eurozone has increased to encompass 19 countries.
The euro currency became the second largest reserve currency in the world. In
2004, the EU saw its biggest enlargement to date when Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia and
Slovenia joined the Union.

In 2007, Romania and Bulgaria became EU members. The same year, Slovenia adopted
the euro, followed in 2008 by Cyprus and Malta, by Slovakia in 2009, by Estonia
in 2011, by Latvia in 2014 and by Lithuania in 2015.

On 1 December 2009, the Lisbon Treaty entered into force and reformed many
aspects of the EU. In particular, it changed the legal structure of the European
Union, merging the EU three pillars system into a single legal entity
provisioned with a legal personality, created a permanent President of the
European Council, the first of which was Herman Van Rompuy, and strengthened the
position of the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy.

In 2012, the EU received the Nobel Peace Prize for having "contributed to the
advancement of peace and reconciliation, democracy, and human rights in Europe."
In 2013, Croatia became the 28th EU member.

From the beginning of the 2010s, the cohesion of the European Union has been
tested by several issues, including a debt crisis in some of the Eurozone
countries, increasing migration from the Middle East and the United Kingdom's
withdrawal from the EU. A referendum in the UK on its membership of the European
Union was held on 23 June 2016, with a majority of participants voting to leave.
As of December 2016[update], the UK has not yet initiated the formal withdrawal
procedure, and will not leave the EU until two years after it notifies the
European Council of its decision to withdraw, or until a withdrawal agreement
comes into force.

The following timeline illustrates the integration that has led to the formation
of the present union, in terms of structural development driven by international
treaties:

The EU's member states cover an area of 4,423,147 square kilometres
(1,707,787 sq mi).[f] The EU's highest peak is Mont Blanc in the Graian Alps,
4,810.45 metres (15,782 ft) above sea level. The lowest points in the EU are
Lammefjorden, Denmark and Zuidplaspolder, Netherlands, at 7 m (23 ft) below sea
level. The landscape, climate, and economy of the EU are influenced by its
coastline, which is 65,993 kilometres (41,006 mi) long.

Including the overseas territories of France which are located outside the
continent of Europe, but which are members of the union, the EU experiences most
types of climate from Arctic (North-East Europe) to tropical (French Guiana),
rendering meteorological averages for the EU as a whole meaningless. The
majority of the population lives in areas with a temperate maritime climate
(North-Western Europe and Central Europe), a Mediterranean climate (Southern
Europe), or a warm summer continental or hemiboreal climate (Northern Balkans
and Central Europe).

The EU's population is highly urbanised, with some 75% of inhabitants living in
urban areas as of 2006. Cities are largely spread out across the EU, although
with a large grouping in and around the Benelux.

Through successive enlargements, the European Union has grown from the six
founding states—Belgium, France, West Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, and the
Netherlands—to the current 28. Countries accede to the union by becoming party
to the founding treaties, thereby subjecting themselves to the privileges and
obligations of EU membership. This entails a partial delegation of sovereignty
to the institutions in return for representation within those institutions, a
practice often referred to as "pooling of sovereignty".

To become a member, a country must meet the Copenhagen criteria, defined at the
1993 meeting of the European Council in Copenhagen. These require a stable
democracy that respects human rights and the rule of law; a functioning market
economy; and the acceptance of the obligations of membership, including EU law.
Evaluation of a country's fulfilment of the criteria is the responsibility of
the European Council. No member state has yet left the Union, although Greenland
(an autonomous province of Denmark) withdrew in 1985. The Lisbon Treaty now
contains a clause under Article 50, providing for a member to leave the EU.

There are six countries that are recognised as candidates for membership:
Albania, Iceland, Macedonia,[g] Montenegro, Serbia, and Turkey, though Iceland
suspended negotiations in 2013. Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo are officially
recognised as potential candidates, with Bosnia and Herzegovina having submitted
a membership application.

The four countries forming the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) are not EU
members, but have partly committed to the EU's economy and regulations: Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Norway, which are a part of the single market through the
European Economic Area, and Switzerland, which has similar ties through
bilateral treaties. The relationships of the European microstates, Andorra,
Monaco, San Marino, and the Vatican include the use of the euro and other areas
of co-operation. The following 28 sovereign states (of which the map only shows
territories situated in and around Europe) constitute the European Union:

In 1957, when the EEC was founded, it had no environmental policy. Over the past
50 years, an increasingly dense network of legislation has been created,
extending to all areas of environmental protection, including air pollution,
water quality, waste management, nature conservation, and the control of
chemicals, industrial hazards and biotechnology. According to the Institute for
European Environmental Policy, environmental law comprises over 500 Directives,
Regulations and Decisions, making environmental policy a core area of European
politics.

European policy-makers originally increased the EU's capacity to act on
environmental issues by defining it as a trade problem. Trade barriers and
competitive distortions in the Common Market could emerge due to the different
environmental standards in each member state. In subsequent years, the
environment became a formal policy area, with its own policy actors, principles
and procedures. The legal basis for EU environmental policy was established with
the introduction of the Single European Act in 1987.

Initially, EU environmental policy focused on Europe. More recently, the EU has
demonstrated leadership in global environmental governance, e.g. the role of the
EU in securing the ratification and coming into force of the Kyoto Protocol
despite opposition from the United States. This international dimension is
reflected in the EU's Sixth Environmental Action Programme, which recognises
that its objectives can only be achieved if key international agreements are
actively supported and properly implemented both at EU level and worldwide. The
Lisbon Treaty further strengthened the leadership ambitions. EU law has played a
significant role in improving habitat and species protection in Europe, as well
as contributing to improvements in air and water quality and waste management.

Mitigating climate change is one of the top priorities of EU environmental
policy. In 2007, member states agreed that, in future, 20% of the energy used
across the EU must be renewable, and carbon dioxide emissions have to be lower
in 2020 by at least 20% compared to 1990 levels. The EU has adopted an emissions
trading system to incorporate carbon emissions into the economy. The European
Green Capital is an annual award given to cities that focuses on the
environment, energy efficiency and quality of life in urban areas to create
smart city.

The European Union operates according to the principles of conferral (which says
that it should act only within the limits of the competences conferred on it by
the treaties) and of subsidiarity (which says that it should act only where an
objective cannot be sufficiently achieved by the member states acting alone).
Laws made by the EU institutions are passed in a variety of forms. Generally
speaking, they can be classified into two groups: those which come into force
without the necessity for national implementation measures (regulations) and
those which specifically require national implementation measures (directives).

The classification of the EU in terms of international or constitutional law has
been much debated. It began life as an international organisation and gradually
developed into a confederation of states. However, since the mid-1960s it has
also added several of the key attributes of a federation, such as the direct
effect of the law of the general level of government upon the individual and
majority voting in the decision-making process of the general level of
government, without becoming a federation per se. Scholars thus today see it as
an intermediate form lying between a confederation and a federation, being an
instance of neither political structure. For this reason, the organisation is
termed sui generis (incomparable, one of a kind), although some argue that this
designation is no longer valid.

The organisation has traditionally used the terms "Community" and later "Union"
to describe itself. The difficulties of classification involve the difference
between national law (where the subjects of the law include natural persons and
corporations) and international law (where the subjects include sovereign states
and international organisations). They can also be seen in the light of
differing European and American constitutional traditions. Especially in terms
of the European tradition, the term federation is equated with a sovereign
federal state in international law; so the EU cannot be called a federation — at
least, not without qualification. It is, however, described as being based on a
federal model or federal in nature; and so it may be appropriate to consider it
a federal union of states, a conceptual structure lying between the
confederation of states and the federal state. The German Constitutional Court
refers to the EU as a Staatenverbund, an intermediate structure between the
Staatenbund (confederation of states) and the Bundesstaat (federal state),
consistent with this concept. This may be a long-lived political form. Professor
Andrew Moravcsik claims that the EU is unlikely to develop further into a
federal state, but instead has reached maturity as a constitutional system.

The European Union has seven institutions: the European Council, the Council of
the European Union, the European Parliament, the European Commission, the Court
of Justice of the European Union, the European Central Bank and the European
Court of Auditors. Competence in scrutinising and amending legislation is shared
between the Council of the European Union and the European Parliament, while
executive tasks are performed by the European Commission and in a limited
capacity by the European Council (not to be confused with the aforementioned
Council of the European Union). The monetary policy of the eurozone is
determined by the European Central Bank. The interpretation and the application
of EU law and the treaties are ensured by the Court of Justice of the European
Union. The EU budget is scrutinised by the European Court of Auditors. There are
also a number of ancillary bodies which advise the EU or operate in a specific
area.

The European Council gives political direction to the EU. It convenes at least
four times a year and comprises the President of the European Council (currently
Donald Tusk), the President of the European Commission and one representative
per member state (either its head of state or head of government). The High
Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy (currently
Federica Mogherini) also takes part in its meetings. It has been described by
some as the Union's "supreme political authority". It is actively involved in
the negotiation of treaty changes and defines the EU's policy agenda and
strategies.

The European Council uses its leadership role to sort out disputes between
member states and the institutions, and to resolve political crises and
disagreements over controversial issues and policies. It acts externally as a
"collective head of state" and ratifies important documents (for example,
international agreements and treaties).

Tasks for the President of the European Council are ensuring the external
representation of the EU, driving consensus and resolving divergences among
member states, both during meetings of the European Council and over the periods
between them.

The European Council should not be mistaken for the Council of Europe, an
international organisation independent of the EU based in Strasbourg.

The Council of the European Union (also called the "Council" and the "Council of
Ministers", its former title) forms one half of the EU's legislature. It
consists of a government minister from each member state and meets in different
compositions depending on the policy area being addressed. Notwithstanding its
different configurations, it is considered to be one single body. In addition to
its legislative functions, the Council also exercises executive functions in
relations to the Common Foreign and Security Policy.

The European Parliament forms the other half of the EU's legislature. The 751
Members of the European Parliament (MEPs) are directly elected by EU citizens
every five years on the basis of proportional representation. Although MEPs are
elected on a national basis, they sit according to political groups rather than
their nationality. Each country has a set number of seats and is divided into
sub-national constituencies where this does not affect the proportional nature
of the voting system.

The European Parliament and the Council of the European Union pass legislation
jointly in nearly all areas under the ordinary legislative procedure. This also
applies to the EU budget. The European Commission is accountable to Parliament,
requiring its approval to take office, having to report back to it and subject
to motions of censure from it. The President of the European Parliament
(currently Antonio Tajani) carries out the role of speaker in Parliament and
represents it externally. The President and Vice-Presidents are elected by MEPs
every two and a half years.

The European Commission acts as the EU's executive arm and is responsible for
initiating legislation and the day-to-day running of the EU. The Commission is
also seen as the motor of European integration. It operates as a cabinet
government, with 28 Commissioners for different areas of policy, one from each
member state, though Commissioners are bound to represent the interests of the
EU as a whole rather than their home state.

One of the 28 is the President of the European Commission (currently Jean-Claude
Juncker) appointed by the European Council. After the President, the most
prominent Commissioner is the High Representative of the Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, who is ex-officio a Vice-President of the
Commission and is also chosen by the European Council. The other 26
Commissioners are subsequently appointed by the Council of the European Union in
agreement with the nominated President. The 28 Commissioners as a single body
are subject to a vote of approval by the European Parliament.

The EU had an agreed budget of €120.7 billion for the year 2007 and
€864.3 billion for the period 2007–2013, representing 1.10% and 1.05% of the
EU-27's GNI forecast for the respective periods. In 1960, the budget of the then
European Economic Community was 0.03% of GDP.

In the 2010 budget of €141.5 billion, the largest single expenditure item is
"cohesion & competitiveness" with around 45% of the total budget. Next comes
"agriculture" with approximately 31% of the total. "Rural development,
environment and fisheries" takes up around 11%. "Administration" accounts for
around 6%. The "EU as a global partner" and "citizenship, freedom, security and
justice" bring up the rear with approximately 6% and 1% respectively.

The Court of Auditors is legally obliged to provide the Parliament and the
Council with "a statement of assurance as to the reliability of the accounts and
the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions". The Court also
gives opinions and proposals on financial legislation and anti-fraud actions.
The Parliament uses this to decide whether to approve the Commission's handling
of the budget.

The European Court of Auditors has signed off the European Union accounts every
year since 2007[when?] and, while making it clear that the European Commission
has more work to do, has highlighted that most of the errors take place at
national level. In their report on 2009 the auditors found that five areas of
Union expenditure, agriculture and the cohesion fund, were materially affected
by error. The European Commission estimated in 2009 that the financial effect of
irregularities was €1,863 million.

EU member states retain all powers not explicitly handed to the European Union.
In some areas the EU enjoys exclusive competence. These are areas in which
member states have renounced any capacity to enact legislation. In other areas
the EU and its member states share the competence to legislate. While both can
legislate, member states can only legislate to the extent to which the EU has
not. In other policy areas the EU can only co-ordinate, support and supplement
member state action but cannot enact legislation with the aim of harmonising
national laws.

That a particular policy area falls into a certain category of competence is not
necessarily indicative of what legislative procedure is used for enacting
legislation within that policy area. Different legislative procedures are used
within the same category of competence, and even with the same policy area.

The EU is based on a series of treaties. These first established the European
Community and the EU, and then made amendments to those founding treaties. These
are power-giving treaties which set broad policy goals and establish
institutions with the necessary legal powers to implement those goals. These
legal powers include the ability to enact legislation[i] which can directly
affect all member states and their inhabitants.[j] The EU has legal personality,
with the right to sign agreements and international treaties.

Under the principle of supremacy, national courts are required to enforce the
treaties that their member states have ratified, and thus the laws enacted under
them, even if doing so requires them to ignore conflicting national law, and
(within limits) even constitutional provisions.[k]

The judicial branch of the EU—formally called the Court of Justice of the
European Union—consists of three courts: the Court of Justice, the General
Court, and the European Union Civil Service Tribunal. Together they interpret
and apply the treaties and the law of the EU.

The Court of Justice primarily deals with cases taken by member states, the
institutions, and cases referred to it by the courts of member states. The
General Court mainly deals with cases taken by individuals and companies
directly before the EU's courts, and the European Union Civil Service Tribunal
adjudicates in disputes between the European Union and its civil service.
Decisions from the General Court can be appealed to the Court of Justice but
only on a point of law.

The treaties declare that the EU itself is "founded on the values of respect for
human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for
human rights, including the rights of persons belonging to minorities ... in a
society in which pluralism, non-discrimination, tolerance, justice, solidarity
and equality between women and men prevail."

In 2009, the Lisbon Treaty gave legal effect to the Charter of Fundamental
Rights of the European Union. The charter is a codified catalogue of fundamental
rights against which the EU's legal acts can be judged. It consolidates many
rights which were previously recognised by the Court of Justice and derived from
the "constitutional traditions common to the member states." The Court of
Justice has long recognised fundamental rights and has, on occasion, invalidated
EU legislation based on its failure to adhere to those fundamental rights.

Although signing the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) is a condition
for EU membership,[l] previously, the EU itself could not accede to the
Convention as it is neither a state[m] nor had the competence to accede.[n] The
Lisbon Treaty and Protocol 14 to the ECHR have changed this: the former binds
the EU to accede to the Convention while the latter formally permits it.

Although, the EU is independent from Council of Europe, they share purpose and
ideas especially on rule of law, human rights and democracy. Further European
Convention on Human Rights and European Social Charter, the source of law of
Charter of Fundamental Rights are created by Council of Europe. The EU also
promoted human rights issues in the wider world. The EU opposes the death
penalty and has proposed its worldwide abolition. Abolition of the death penalty
is a condition for EU membership.

The main legal acts of the EU come in three forms: regulations, directives, and
decisions. Regulations become law in all member states the moment they come into
force, without the requirement for any implementing measures,[o] and
automatically override conflicting domestic provisions.[i] Directives require
member states to achieve a certain result while leaving them discretion as to
how to achieve the result. The details of how they are to be implemented are
left to member states.[p] When the time limit for implementing directives
passes, they may, under certain conditions, have direct effect in national law
against member states.

Decisions offer an alternative to the two above modes of legislation. They are
legal acts which only apply to specified individuals, companies or a particular
member state. They are most often used in competition law, or on rulings on
State Aid, but are also frequently used for procedural or administrative matters
within the institutions. Regulations, directives, and decisions are of equal
legal value and apply without any formal hierarchy.

Since the creation of the EU in 1993, it has developed its competencies in the
area of freedom, security and justice, initially at an intergovernmental level
and later by supranationalism. To this end, agencies have been established that
co-ordinate associated actions: Europol for co-operation of police forces,
Eurojust for co-operation between prosecutors, and Frontex for co-operation
between border control authorities. The EU also operates the Schengen
Information System which provides a common database for police and immigration
authorities. This co-operation had to particularly be developed with the advent
of open borders through the Schengen Agreement and the associated cross border
crime.

Furthermore, the Union has legislated in areas such as extradition, family law,
asylum law, and criminal justice. Prohibitions against sexual and nationality
discrimination have a long standing in the treaties.[q] In more recent years,
these have been supplemented by powers to legislate against discrimination based
on race, religion, disability, age, and sexual orientation.[r] By virtue of
these powers, the EU has enacted legislation on sexual discrimination in the
work-place, age discrimination, and racial discrimination.[s]

Foreign policy co-operation between member states dates from the establishment
of the Community in 1957, when member states negotiated as a bloc in
international trade negotiations under the common commercial policy. Steps for a
more wide-ranging co-ordination in foreign relations began in 1970 with the
establishment of European Political Cooperation which created an informal
consultation process between member states with the aim of forming common
foreign policies. It was not, however, until 1987 when European Political
Cooperation was introduced on a formal basis by the Single European Act. EPC was
renamed as the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) by the Maastricht
Treaty.

The aims of the CFSP are to promote both the EU's own interests and those of the
international community as a whole, including the furtherance of international
co-operation, respect for human rights, democracy, and the rule of law. The CFSP
requires unanimity among the member states on the appropriate policy to follow
on any particular issue. The unanimity and difficult issues treated under the
CFSP sometimes lead to disagreements, such as those which occurred over the war
in Iraq.

The coordinator and representative of the CFSP within the EU is the High
Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy who speaks
on behalf of the EU in foreign policy and defence matters, and has the task of
articulating the positions expressed by the member states on these fields of
policy into a common alignment. The High Representative heads up the European
External Action Service (EEAS), a unique EU department that has been officially
implemented and operational since 1 December 2010 on the occasion of the first
anniversary of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon. The EEAS will serve
as a foreign ministry and diplomatic corps for the European Union.

Besides the emerging international policy of the European Union, the
international influence of the EU is also felt through enlargement. The
perceived benefits of becoming a member of the EU act as an incentive for both
political and economic reform in states wishing to fulfil the EU's accession
criteria, and are considered an important factor contributing to the reform of
European formerly Communist countries.:762 This influence on the internal
affairs of other countries is generally referred to as "soft power", as opposed
to military "hard power".

The predecessors of the European Union were not devised as a military alliance
because NATO was largely seen as appropriate and sufficient for defence
purposes. 22 EU members are members of NATO while the remaining member states
follow policies of neutrality. The Western European Union, a military alliance
with a mutual defence clause, was disbanded in 2010 as its role had been
transferred to the EU.

According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), the
United Kingdom spent $61 billion on defence in 2014, placing it fifth in the
world, while France spent $53 billion, the sixth largest. Together, the UK and
France account for approximately 40 per cent of European countries' defence
budget and 50 per cent of their military capacity. Both are officially
recognised nuclear weapon states holding permanent seats on the United Nations
Security Council.

Following the Kosovo War in 1999, the European Council agreed that "the Union
must have the capacity for autonomous action, backed by credible military
forces, the means to decide to use them, and the readiness to do so, in order to
respond to international crises without prejudice to actions by NATO". To that
end, a number of efforts were made to increase the EU's military capability,
notably the Helsinki Headline Goal process. After much discussion, the most
concrete result was the EU Battlegroups initiative, each of which is planned to
be able to deploy quickly about 1500 personnel.

EU forces have been deployed on peacekeeping missions from middle and northern
Africa to the western Balkans and western Asia. EU military operations are
supported by a number of bodies, including the European Defence Agency, European
Union Satellite Centre and the European Union Military Staff. Frontex is an
agency of the EU established to manage the cooperation between national border
guards securing its external borders. It aims to detect and stop illegal
immigration, human trafficking and terrorist infiltration. In 2015 the European
Commission presented its proposal for a new European Border and Coast Guard
Agency having a stronger role and mandate along with national authorities for
border management. In an EU consisting of 28 members, substantial security and
defence co-operation is increasingly relying on collaboration among all member
states.

The European Commission's Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection department, or
"ECHO", provides humanitarian aid from the EU to developing countries. In 2012,
its budget amounted to €874 million, 51% of the budget went to Africa and 20% to
Asia, Latin America, the Caribbean and Pacific, and 20% to the Middle East and
Mediterranean.

Humanitarian aid is financed directly by the budget (70%) as part of the
financial instruments for external action and also by the European Development
Fund (30%). The EU's external action financing is divided into 'geographic'
instruments and 'thematic' instruments. The 'geographic' instruments provide aid
through the Development Cooperation Instrument (DCI, €16.9 billion, 2007–2013),
which must spend 95% of its budget on overseas development assistance (ODA), and
from the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument (ENPI), which
contains some relevant programmes. The European Development Fund (EDF, €22.7 bn,
2008–2013) is made up of voluntary contributions by member states, but there is
pressure to merge the EDF into the budget-financed instruments to encourage
increased contributions to match the 0.7% target and allow the European
Parliament greater oversight.

However, five countries have reached the 0.7% target: Sweden, Luxembourg, the
Netherlands, Denmark and the United Kingdom.

The European Union has established a single market across the territory of all
its members representing 510 million citizens. In 2014, the EU had a combined
GDP of 18.640 trillion international dollars, a 20% share of global gross
domestic product by purchasing power parity (PPP). As a political entity the
European Union is represented in the World Trade Organization (WTO). EU member
states own the estimated largest net wealth in the world, equal to 30% of the
$223 trillion global wealth.[citation needed]

19 member states have joined a monetary union known as the eurozone, which uses
the Euro as a single currency. The currency union represents 338 million EU
citizens. The euro is the second largest reserve currency as well as the second
most traded currency in the world after the United States dollar.

Of the top 500 largest corporations in the world measured by revenue in 2010,
161 have their headquarters in the EU. In 2016, unemployment in the EU stood at
8.9% while inflation was at 2.2%, and the current account balance at −0.9% of
GDP. The average annual net wage in the European Union was around $20,000 in
2015, which was about half of that in the United States.

There is a significant variance for GDP (PPP) per capita within individual EU
states. The difference between the richest and poorest regions (276 NUTS-2
regions of the Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics) ranged, in
2014, from 30% of the EU28 average to 539%, or from €8,200 to €148,000 (about
US$9,000 to US$162,000).

Structural Funds and Cohesion Funds are supporting the development of
underdeveloped regions of the EU. Such regions are primarily located in the
states of central and southern Europe. Several funds provide emergency aid,
support for candidate members to transform their country to conform to the EU's
standard (Phare, ISPA, and SAPARD), and support to the Commonwealth of
Independent States (TACIS). TACIS has now become part of the worldwide EuropeAid
programme. EU research and technological framework programmes sponsor research
conducted by consortia from all EU members to work towards a single European
Research Area.

Two of the original core objectives of the European Economic Community were the
development of a common market, subsequently becoming a single market, and a
customs union between its member states. The single market involves the free
circulation of goods, capital, people, and services within the EU, and the
customs union involves the application of a common external tariff on all goods
entering the market. Once goods have been admitted into the market they cannot
be subjected to customs duties, discriminatory taxes or import quotas, as they
travel internally. The non-EU member states of Iceland, Norway, Liechtenstein
and Switzerland participate in the single market but not in the customs union.
Half the trade in the EU is covered by legislation harmonised by the EU.

Free movement of capital is intended to permit movement of investments such as
property purchases and buying of shares between countries. Until the drive
towards economic and monetary union the development of the capital provisions
had been slow. Post-Maastricht there has been a rapidly developing corpus of ECJ
judgements regarding this initially neglected freedom. The free movement of
capital is unique insofar as it is granted equally to non-member states.

The free movement of persons means that EU citizens can move freely between
member states to live, work, study or retire in another country. This required
the lowering of administrative formalities and recognition of professional
qualifications of other states.

The free movement of services and of establishment allows self-employed persons
to move between member states to provide services on a temporary or permanent
basis. While services account for 60–70% of GDP, legislation in the area is not
as developed as in other areas. This lacuna has been addressed by the recently
passed Directive on services in the internal market which aims to liberalise the
cross border provision of services. According to the Treaty the provision of
services is a residual freedom that only applies if no other freedom is being
exercised.

The creation of a European single currency became an official objective of the
European Economic Community in 1969. In 1992, having negotiated the structure
and procedures of a currency union, the member states signed the Maastricht
Treaty and were legally bound to fulfil the agreed-on rules including the
convergence criteria if they wanted to join the monetary union. The states
wanting to participate had first to join the European Exchange Rate Mechanism.

In 1999 the currency union started, first as an accounting currency with eleven
member states joining. In 2002, the currency was fully put into place, when euro
notes and coins were issued and national currencies began to phase out in the
eurozone, which by then consisted of 12 member states. The eurozone (constituted
by the EU member states which have adopted the euro) has since grown to 19
countries.[t]

The euro, and the monetary policies of those who have adopted it in agreement
with the EU, are under the control of the European Central Bank (ECB). The ECB
is the central bank for the eurozone, and thus controls monetary policy in that
area with an agenda to maintain price stability. It is at the centre of the
European System of Central Banks, which comprehends all EU national central
banks and is controlled by its General Council, consisting of the President of
the ECB, who is appointed by the European Council, the Vice-President of the
ECB, and the governors of the national central banks of all 28 EU member states.

The European System of Financial Supervision is an institutional architecture of
the EU's framework of financial supervision composed by three authorities: the
European Banking Authority, the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions
Authority and the European Securities and Markets Authority. To complement this
framework, there is also a European Systemic Risk Board under the responsibility
of the ECB. The aim of this financial control system is to ensure the economic
stability of the EU.

In 2006, the EU-27 had a gross inland energy consumption of 1,825 million tonnes
of oil equivalent (toe). Around 46% of the energy consumed was produced within
the member states while 54% was imported. In these statistics, nuclear energy is
treated as primary energy produced in the EU, regardless of the source of the
uranium, of which less than 3% is produced in the EU.

The EU has had legislative power in the area of energy policy for most of its
existence; this has its roots in the original European Coal and Steel Community.
The introduction of a mandatory and comprehensive European energy policy was
approved at the meeting of the European Council in October 2005, and the first
draft policy was published in January 2007.

The EU has five key points in its energy policy: increase competition in the
internal market, encourage investment and boost interconnections between
electricity grids; diversify energy resources with better systems to respond to
a crisis; establish a new treaty framework for energy co-operation with Russia
while improving relations with energy-rich states in Central Asia and North
Africa; use existing energy supplies more efficiently while increasing renewable
energy commercialisation; and finally increase funding for new energy
technologies.

In 2007, EU countries as a whole imported 82% of their oil, 57% of their natural
gas and 97.48% of their uranium demands. There is a strong dependence on Russian
energy that the EU has been attempting to reduce.

The EU is working to improve cross-border infrastructure within the EU, for
example through the Trans-European Networks (TEN). Projects under TEN include
the Channel Tunnel, LGV Est, the Fréjus Rail Tunnel, the Öresund Bridge, the
Brenner Base Tunnel and the Strait of Messina Bridge. In 2010 the estimated
network covers: 75,200 kilometres (46,700 mi) of roads; 78,000 kilometres
(48,000 mi) of railways; 330 airports; 270 maritime harbours; and 210 internal
harbours.

Rail transport in Europe is being synchronised with the European Rail Traffic
Management System (ERTMS), an initiative to greatly enhance safety, increase
efficiency of trains and enhance cross-border interoperability of rail transport
in Europe by replacing signalling equipment with digitised mostly wireless
versions and by creating a single Europe-wide standard for train control and
command systems.

The developing European transport policies will increase the pressure on the
environment in many regions by the increased transport network. In the pre-2004
EU members, the major problem in transport deals with congestion and pollution.
After the recent enlargement, the new states that joined since 2004 added the
problem of solving accessibility to the transport agenda. The Polish road
network was upgraded such as the A4 autostrada.

The Galileo positioning system is another EU infrastructure project. Galileo is
a proposed Satellite navigation system, to be built by the EU and launched by
the European Space Agency (ESA). The Galileo project was launched partly to
reduce the EU's dependency on the US-operated Global Positioning System, but
also to give more complete global coverage and allow for greater accuracy, given
the aged nature of the GPS system.

The Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) is one of the long lasting policies of the
European Community. The policy has the objectives of increasing agricultural
production, providing certainty in food supplies, ensuring a high quality of
life for farmers, stabilising markets, and ensuring reasonable prices for
consumers.[v] It was, until recently, operated by a system of subsidies and
market intervention. Until the 1990s, the policy accounted for over 60% of the
then European Community's annual budget, and as of 2013[update] accounts for
around 34%.[not in citation given]

The policy's price controls and market interventions led to considerable
overproduction. These were intervention stores of products bought up by the
Community to maintain minimum price levels. To dispose of surplus stores, they
were often sold on the world market at prices considerably below Community
guaranteed prices, or farmers were offered subsidies (amounting to the
difference between the Community and world prices) to export their products
outside the Community. This system has been criticised for under-cutting farmers
outside Europe, especially those in the developing world. Supporters of CAP
argue that the economic support which it gives to farmers provides them with a
reasonable standard of living.

Since the beginning of the 1990s, the CAP has been subject to a series of
reforms. Initially, these reforms included the introduction of set-aside in
1988, where a proportion of farm land was deliberately withdrawn from
production, milk quotas and, more recently, the 'de-coupling' (or
disassociation) of the money farmers receive from the EU and the amount they
produce (by the Fischler reforms in 2004). Agriculture expenditure will move
away from subsidy payments linked to specific produce, toward direct payments
based on farm size. This is intended to allow the market to dictate production
levels. One of these reforms entailed the modification of the EU's sugar regime,
which previously divided the sugar market between member states and certain
African-Caribbean nations with a privileged relationship with the EU.

The EU operates a competition policy intended to ensure undistorted competition
within the single market.[w] The Commission as the competition regulator for the
single market is responsible for antitrust issues, approving mergers, breaking
up cartels, working for economic liberalisation and preventing state aid.[not in
citation given]

The Competition Commissioner, currently Margrethe Vestager, is one of the most
powerful positions in the Commission, notable for the ability to affect the
commercial interests of trans-national corporations.[not in citation given] For
example, in 2001 the Commission for the first time prevented a merger between
two companies based in the United States (GE and Honeywell) which had already
been approved by their national authority. Another high-profile case against
Microsoft, resulted in the Commission fining Microsoft over €777 million
following nine years of legal action.

As of 1 January 2016, the population of the European Union is about
510.1 million people. In 2013, 5,075,000 live births were registered and
4,999,200 deaths. The net migration to the EU was +653,100. In 2010, 47.3
million people who lived in the EU were born outside their resident country.
This corresponds to 9.4% of the total EU population. Of these, 31.4 million
(6.3%) were born outside the EU and 16.0 million (3.2%) were born in another EU
member state. The largest absolute numbers of people born outside the EU were in
Germany (6.4 million), France (5.1 million), the United Kingdom (4.7 million),
Spain (4.1 million), Italy (3.2 million), and the Netherlands (1.4 million).

The EU contains about 40 urban areas with populations of over one million. In
addition to large agglomerations, the EU also includes several densely populated
polycentric urbanised regions that have no single core but have emerged from the
connection of several cities and now encompass a large metropolis. The largest
of these polycentric metropolis include Rhine-Ruhr with approximately
11.5 million inhabitants (Cologne, Dortmund, Düsseldorf et al.), Randstad with
approx. 7 million (Amsterdam, Rotterdam, The Hague, Utrecht et al.), Frankfurt
Rhine-Main with approx. 5.8 million (Frankfurt, Wiesbaden et al.), the Flemish
Diamond with approx. 5.5 million (Antwerp, Brussels, Leuven, Ghent et al.),
Upper Silesia with approx. 5.3 million (Katowice, Ostrava) and Øresund with
approx. 3.7 million (Copenhagen, Malmö).

Among the many languages and dialects used in the EU, it has 24 official and
working languages: Bulgarian, Croatian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Estonian,
Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Irish, Latvian, Lithuanian,
Maltese, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Slovak, Slovene, Spanish, and Swedish.
Important documents, such as legislation, are translated into every official
language.

The European Parliament provides translation into all languages for documents
and its plenary sessions. Some institutions use only a handful of languages as
internal working languages. Catalan, Galician, Basque, Scottish Gaelic and Welsh
are not official languages of the EU but have semi-official status in that
official translations of the treaties are made into them and citizens of the EU
have the right to correspond with the institutions using them.

Language policy is the responsibility of member states, but EU institutions
promote the learning of other languages.[x] English is the most widely spoken
language in the EU, being spoken by 51% of the EU population when counting both
native and non-native speakers. German is the most widely spoken mother tongue,
being spoken by 16% of the EU population. 56% of EU citizens are able to engage
in a conversation in a language other than their mother tongue. Most official
languages of the EU belong to the Indo-European language family, except
Estonian, Finnish, and Hungarian, which belong to the Uralic language family,
and Maltese, which is a Semitic language. Most EU official languages are written
in the Latin alphabet except Bulgarian, which is written in the Cyrillic
alphabet, and Greek, which is written in the Greek alphabet. These are the three
official scripts of the European Union.

Besides the 24 official languages, there are about 150 regional and minority
languages, spoken by up to 50 million people. Although EU programmes can support
regional and minority languages, the protection of linguistic rights is a matter
for the individual member states. The European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages ratified by most EU states provides general guidelines that states can
follow to protect their linguistic heritage.

The European Day of Languages is held annually on 26 September and is aimed at
encouraging language learning across Europe.

The EU has no formal connection to any religion. The Article 17 of the Treaty on
the Functioning of the European Union recognises the "status under national law
of churches and religious associations" as well as that of "philosophical and
non-confessional organisations".

The preamble to the Treaty on European Union mentions the "cultural, religious
and humanist inheritance of Europe". Discussion over the draft texts of the
European Constitution and later the Treaty of Lisbon included proposals to
mention Christianity or God, or both, in the preamble of the text, but the idea
faced opposition and was dropped.

Christians in the EU are divided among members of Catholicism (both Roman and
Eastern Rite), numerous Protestant denominations (Anglicans, Lutherans and
Reformed forming the bulk of this category), and the Eastern Orthodox Church. In
2009, the EU had an estimated Muslim population of 13 million, and an estimated
Jewish population of over a million. The other world religions of Buddhism,
Hinduism and Sikhism are also represented in the EU population.

According to new polls about religiosity in the European Union in 2012 by
Eurobarometer, Christianity is the largest religion in the European Union,
accounting for 72% of the EU population. Catholics are the largest Christian
group, accounting for 48% of the EU population, while Protestants make up 12%,
Eastern Orthodox make up 8% and other Christians make up 4%.

Eurostat's Eurobarometer opinion polls showed in 2005 that 52% of EU citizens
believed in a God, 27% in "some sort of spirit or life force", and 18% had no
form of belief. Many countries have experienced falling church attendance and
membership in recent years. The countries where the fewest people reported a
religious belief were Estonia (16%) and the Czech Republic (19%). The most
religious countries were Malta (95%, predominantly Roman Catholic) as well as
Cyprus and Romania (both predominantly Orthodox) each with about 90% of citizens
professing a belief in God. Across the EU, belief was higher among women, older
people, those with religious upbringing, those who left school at 15 or 16 and
those "positioning themselves on the right of the political scale".

Basic education is an area where the EU's role is limited to supporting national
governments. In higher education, the policy was developed in the 1980s in
programmes supporting exchanges and mobility. The most visible of these has been
the Erasmus Programme, a university exchange programme which began in 1987. In
its first 20 years, it has supported international exchange opportunities for
well over 1.5 million university and college students and has become a symbol of
European student life.

There are now similar programmes for school pupils and teachers, for trainees in
vocational education and training, and for adult learners in the Lifelong
Learning Programme 2007–2013. These programmes are designed to encourage a wider
knowledge of other countries and to spread good practices in the education and
training fields across the EU. Through its support of the Bologna Process, the
EU is supporting comparable standards and compatible degrees across Europe.

Scientific development is facilitated through the EU's Framework Programmes, the
first of which started in 1984. The aims of EU policy in this area are to
co-ordinate and stimulate research. The independent European Research Council
allocates EU funds to European or national research projects. EU research and
technological framework programmes deal in a number of areas, for example energy
where the aim is to develop a diverse mix of renewable energy to help the
environment and to reduce dependence on imported fuels.

Although the EU has no major competences in the field of health care, Article 35
of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union affirms that "A high
level of human health protection shall be ensured in the definition and
implementation of all Union policies and activities". The European Commission's
Directorate-General for Health and Consumers seeks to align national laws on the
protection of people's health, on the consumers' rights, on the safety of food
and other products.

All EU and many other European countries offer their citizens a free European
Health Insurance Card which, on a reciprocal basis, provides insurance for
emergency medical treatment insurance when visiting other participating European
countries. A directive on cross-border healthcare aims at promoting co-operation
on health care between member states and facilitating access to safe and
high-quality cross-border healthcare for European patients.

Cultural co-operation between member states has been a concern of the EU since
its inclusion as a community competency in the Maastricht Treaty. Actions taken
in the cultural area by the EU include the Culture 2000 seven-year programme,
the European Cultural Month event, and orchestras such as the European Union
Youth Orchestra.

The European Capital of Culture programme selects one or more cities in every
year to assist the cultural development of that city. 53 EU cities have been
part of this initiative up to 2016.

Sport is mainly the responsibility of the member states or other international
organisations, rather than of the EU. However, there are some EU policies that
have affected sport, such as the free movement of workers, which was at the core
of the Bosman ruling that prohibited national football leagues from imposing
quotas on foreign players with European citizenship.

The Treaty of Lisbon requires any application of economic rules to take into
account the specific nature of sport and its structures based on voluntary
activity. This followed lobbying by governing organisations such as the
International Olympic Committee and FIFA, due to objections over the application
of free market principles to sport, which led to an increasing gap between rich
and poor clubs. The EU does fund a programme for Israeli, Jordanian, Irish, and
British football coaches, as part of the Football 4 Peace project.

The flag of the Union consists of a circle of 12 golden stars on a blue
background. The blue represents the West, while the number and position of the
stars represent completeness and unity, respectively. Originally designed in
1955 for the Council of Europe, the flag was adopted by the European
Communities, the predecessors of the present Union, in 1986.

United in Diversity was adopted as the motto of the Union in the year 2000,
having been selected from proposals submitted by school pupils. Since 1985, the
flag day of the Union has been Europe Day, on 9 May (the date of the 1950
Schuman declaration). The anthem of the Union is an instrumental version of the
prelude to the Ode to Joy, the 4th movement of Ludwig van Beethoven's ninth
symphony. The anthem was adopted by European Community leaders in 1985 and has
since been played on official occasions.

Besides naming the continent, the Greek mythological figure of Europa has
frequently been employed as a personification of Europe. Known from the myth in
which Zeus seduces her in the guise of a white bull, Europa has also been
referred to in relation to the present Union. Statues of Europa and the bull
decorate several of the Union's institutions and a portrait of her is seen on
the 2013 series of Euro banknotes. The bull is, for its part, depicted on all
residence permit cards.

Charles the Great, also known as Charlemagne (Latin: Carolus Magnus) and later
recognised as Pater Europae ("Father of Europe"), has a symbolic relevance to
Europe. The Commission has named one of its central buildings in Brussels after
Charlemagne and the city of Aachen has since 1949 awarded the Charlemagne Prize
to champions of European unification. Since 2008, the organisers of this prize,
in conjunction with the European Parliament, have awarded the Charlemagne Youth
Prize in recognition of similar efforts by young people.

Benedict of Nursia (c. 2 March 480 – 543 or 547 AD) is a patron saint of Europe,
venerated in the Eastern Orthodox Churches, the Catholic Church, the Oriental
Orthodox Churches, the Anglican Communion and Old Catholic Churches. Pope
Benedict XVI said that he "exercised a fundamental influence on the development
of European civilization and culture" and helped Europe to emerge from the "dark
night of history" that followed the fall of the Roman empire. The influence of
St Benedict produced "a true spiritual ferment" in Europe, his followers
spreading his Rule across the continent to establish a new cultural unity based
on Christian faith. In 1997, Polish-born Pope John Paul II canonised Poland's
14th-century monarch Jadwiga as Saint Hedwig, the patron saint of queens and of
European unification

Media freedom is a fundamental right that applies to all member states of the
European Union and its citizens, as defined in the EU Charter of Fundamental
Rights as well as the European Convention on Human Rights.:1 Within the EU
enlargement process, guaranteeing media freedom is named a "key indicator of a
country's readiness to become part of the EU".

The MEDIA Programme of the European Union intends to support the European
popular film and audiovisual industries since 1991. It provides support for the
development, promotion and distribution of European works within Europe and
beyond.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia

Wikipedia (i/ˌwɪkᵻˈpiːdiə/ or i/ˌwɪkiˈpiːdiə/ WIK-i-PEE-dee-ə) is a free online
encyclopedia that aims to allow anyone to edit articles. Wikipedia is the
largest and most popular general reference work on the Internet and is ranked
among the ten most popular websites. Wikipedia is owned by the nonprofit
Wikimedia Foundation.

Wikipedia was launched on January 15, 2001, by Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger.
Sanger coined its name, a portmanteau of wiki[notes 4] and encyclopedia. There
was only the English language version initially, but it quickly developed
similar versions in other languages, which differ in content and in editing
practices. With 5,358,144 articles, the English Wikipedia is the largest of the
more than 290 Wikipedia encyclopedias. Overall, Wikipedia consists of more than
40 million articles in more than 250 different languages and, as of February
2014[update], it had 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique
visitors each month.

In 2005, Nature published a peer review comparing 42 science articles from
Encyclopædia Britannica and Wikipedia, and found that Wikipedia's level of
accuracy approached Encyclopædia Britannica's. Criticism of Wikipedia includes
claims that it exhibits systemic bias, presents a mixture of "truths, half
truths, and some falsehoods", and that, in controversial topics, it is subject
to manipulation and spin.

Other collaborative online encyclopedias were attempted before Wikipedia, but
none were so successful.

Wikipedia began as a complementary project for Nupedia, a free online
English-language encyclopedia project whose articles were written by experts and
reviewed under a formal process. Nupedia was founded on March 9, 2000, under the
ownership of Bomis, a web portal company. Its main figures were Jimmy Wales, the
CEO of Bomis, and Larry Sanger, editor-in-chief for Nupedia and later Wikipedia.
Nupedia was licensed initially under its own Nupedia Open Content License,
switching to the GNU Free Documentation License before Wikipedia's founding at
the urging of Richard Stallman. Sanger and Wales founded Wikipedia. While Wales
is credited with defining the goal of making a publicly editable encyclopedia,
Sanger is credited with the strategy of using a wiki to reach that goal. On
January 10, 2001, Sanger proposed on the Nupedia mailing list to create a wiki
as a "feeder" project for Nupedia.

Wikipedia was launched on January 15, 2001, as a single English-language edition
at www.wikipedia.com, and announced by Sanger on the Nupedia mailing list.
Wikipedia's policy of "neutral point-of-view" was codified in its first months.
Otherwise, there were relatively few rules initially and Wikipedia operated
independently of Nupedia. Originally, Bomis intended to make Wikipedia a
business for profit.

Wikipedia gained early contributors from Nupedia, Slashdot postings, and web
search engine indexing. By August 8, 2001, Wikipedia had over 8,000 articles. On
September 25, 2001, Wikipedia had over 13,000 articles. By the end of 2001, it
had grown to approximately 20,000 articles and 18 language editions. It had
reached 26 language editions by late 2002, 46 by the end of 2003, and 161 by the
final days of 2004. Nupedia and Wikipedia coexisted until the former's servers
were taken down permanently in 2003, and its text was incorporated into
Wikipedia. The English Wikipedia passed the mark of two million articles on
September 9, 2007, making it the largest encyclopedia ever assembled, surpassing
even the 1408 Yongle Encyclopedia, which had held the record for almost
600 years.

Citing fears of commercial advertising and lack of control in Wikipedia, users
of the Spanish Wikipedia forked from Wikipedia to create the Enciclopedia Libre
in February 2002. These moves encouraged Wales to announce that Wikipedia would
not display advertisements, and to change Wikipedia's domain from wikipedia.com
to wikipedia.org.

Though the English Wikipedia reached three million articles in August 2009, the
growth of the edition, in terms of the numbers of articles and of contributors,
appears to have peaked around early 2007. Around 1,800 articles were added daily
to the encyclopedia in 2006; by 2013 that average was roughly 800. A team at the
Palo Alto Research Center attributed this slowing of growth to the project's
increasing exclusivity and resistance to change. Others suggest that the growth
is flattening naturally because articles that could be called "low-hanging
fruit"—topics that clearly merit an article—have already been created and built
up extensively.

In November 2009, a researcher at the Rey Juan Carlos University in Madrid
(Spain) found that the English Wikipedia had lost 49,000 editors during the
first three months of 2009; in comparison, the project lost only 4,900 editors
during the same period in 2008. The Wall Street Journal cited the array of rules
applied to editing and disputes related to such content among the reasons for
this trend. Wales disputed these claims in 2009, denying the decline and
questioning the methodology of the study. Two years later, in 2011, Wales
acknowledged the presence of a slight decline, noting a decrease from "a little
more than 36,000 writers" in June 2010 to 35,800 in June 2011. In the same
interview, Wales also claimed the number of editors was "stable and
sustainable". A 2013 article titled "The Decline of Wikipedia" in MIT's
Technology Review questioned this claim. The article revealed that since 2007,
Wikipedia had lost a third of the volunteer editors who update and correct the
online encyclopedia and those still there have focused increasingly on minutiae.
In July 2012, the Atlantic reported that the number of administrators is also in
decline. In the November 25, 2013, issue of New York magazine, Katherine Ward
stated "Wikipedia, the sixth-most-used website, is facing an internal crisis".

In January 2007, Wikipedia entered for the first time the top-ten list of the
most popular websites in the U.S., according to comScore Networks. With 42.9
million unique visitors, Wikipedia was ranked number 9, surpassing the New York
Times (#10) and Apple (#11). This marked a significant increase over January
2006, when the rank was number 33, with Wikipedia receiving around 18.3 million
unique visitors. As of March 2015[update], Wikipedia has rank 5 among websites
in terms of popularity according to Alexa Internet. In 2014, it received 8
billion pageviews every month. On February 9, 2014, The New York Times reported
that Wikipedia has 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors
a month, "according to the ratings firm comScore."

On January 18, 2012, the English Wikipedia participated in a series of
coordinated protests against two proposed laws in the United States Congress—the
Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA) and the PROTECT IP Act (PIPA)—by blacking out its
pages for 24 hours. More than 162 million people viewed the blackout explanation
page that temporarily replaced Wikipedia content.

Loveland and Reagle argue that, in process, Wikipedia follows a long tradition
of historical encyclopedias that accumulated improvements piecemeal through
"stigmergic accumulation".

On January 20, 2014, Subodh Varma reporting for The Economic Times indicated
that not only had Wikipedia's growth flattened but that it has "lost nearly 10
per cent of its page-views last year. That's a decline of about 2 billion
between December 2012 and December 2013. Its most popular versions are leading
the slide: page-views of the English Wikipedia declined by 12 per cent, those of
German version slid by 17 per cent and the Japanese version lost 9 per cent."
Varma added that, "While Wikipedia's managers think that this could be due to
errors in counting, other experts feel that Google's Knowledge Graphs project
launched last year may be gobbling up Wikipedia users." When contacted on this
matter, Clay Shirky, associate professor at New York University and fellow at
Harvard's Berkman Center for Internet and Security indicated that he suspected
much of the page view decline was due to Knowledge Graphs, stating, "If you can
get your question answered from the search page, you don't need to click [any
further]."

By the end of December 2016, Wikipedia was ranked fifth in the most popular
websites globally.

Unlike traditional encyclopedias, Wikipedia follows the procrastination
principle[notes 5] regarding the security of its content. It started almost
entirely open—anyone could create articles, and any Wikipedia article could be
edited by any reader, even those who did not have a Wikipedia account.
Modifications to all articles would be published immediately. As a result, any
article could contain inaccuracies such as errors, ideological biases, and
nonsensical or irrelevant text.

Due to the increasing popularity of Wikipedia, popular editions, including the
English version, have introduced editing restrictions in some cases. For
instance, on the English Wikipedia and some other language editions, only
registered users may create a new article. On the English Wikipedia, among
others, some particularly controversial, sensitive and/or vandalism-prone pages
have been protected to some degree. A frequently vandalized article can be
semi-protected or extended confirmed protected, meaning that only autoconfirmed
or extended confirmed editors are able to modify it. A particularly contentious
article may be locked so that only administrators are able to make changes.

In certain cases, all editors are allowed to submit modifications, but review is
required for some editors, depending on certain conditions. For example, the
German Wikipedia maintains "stable versions" of articles, which have passed
certain reviews. Following protracted trials and community discussion, the
English Wikipedia introduced the "pending changes" system in December 2012.
Under this system, new and unregistered users' edits to certain controversial or
vandalism-prone articles are reviewed by established users before they are
published.

Although changes are not systematically reviewed, the software that powers
Wikipedia provides certain tools allowing anyone to review changes made by
others. The "History" page of each article links to each revision.[notes 6] On
most articles, anyone can undo others' changes by clicking a link on the
article's history page. Anyone can view the latest changes to articles, and
anyone may maintain a "watchlist" of articles that interest them so they can be
notified of any changes. "New pages patrol" is a process whereby newly created
articles are checked for obvious problems.

In 2003, economics PhD student Andrea Ciffolilli argued that the low transaction
costs of participating in a wiki create a catalyst for collaborative
development, and that features such as allowing easy access to past versions of
a page favor "creative construction" over "creative destruction".

Any change or edit that manipulates content in a way that purposefully
compromises the integrity of Wikipedia is considered vandalism. The most common
and obvious types of vandalism include additions of obscenities and crude humor.
Vandalism can also include advertising and other types of spam. Sometimes
editors commit vandalism by removing content or entirely blanking a given page.
Less common types of vandalism, such as the deliberate addition of plausible but
false information to an article, can be more difficult to detect. Vandals can
introduce irrelevant formatting, modify page semantics such as the page's title
or categorization, manipulate the underlying code of an article, or use images
disruptively.

Obvious vandalism is generally easy to remove from Wikipedia articles; the
median time to detect and fix vandalism is a few minutes. However, some
vandalism takes much longer to repair.

In the Seigenthaler biography incident, an anonymous editor introduced false
information into the biography of American political figure John Seigenthaler in
May 2005. Seigenthaler was falsely presented as a suspect in the assassination
of John F. Kennedy. The article remained uncorrected for four months.
Seigenthaler, the founding editorial director of USA Today and founder of the
Freedom Forum First Amendment Center at Vanderbilt University, called Wikipedia
co-founder Jimmy Wales and asked whether he had any way of knowing who
contributed the misinformation. Wales replied that he did not, although the
perpetrator was eventually traced. After the incident, Seigenthaler described
Wikipedia as "a flawed and irresponsible research tool". This incident led to
policy changes at Wikipedia, specifically targeted at tightening up the
verifiability of biographical articles of living people.

Content in Wikipedia is subject to the laws (in particular, copyright laws) of
the United States and of the U.S. state of Virginia, where the majority of
Wikipedia's servers are located. Beyond legal matters, the editorial principles
of Wikipedia are embodied in the "five pillars" and in numerous policies and
guidelines intended to appropriately shape content. Even these rules are stored
in wiki form, and Wikipedia editors write and revise the website's policies and
guidelines. Editors can enforce these rules by deleting or modifying
non-compliant material. Originally, rules on the non-English editions of
Wikipedia were based on a translation of the rules for the English Wikipedia.
They have since diverged to some extent.

According to the rules on the English Wikipedia, each entry in Wikipedia must be
about a topic that is encyclopedic and is not a dictionary entry or
dictionary-like. A topic should also meet Wikipedia's standards of "notability",
which generally means that the topic must have been covered in mainstream media
or major academic journal sources that are independent of the article's subject.
Further, Wikipedia intends to convey only knowledge that is already established
and recognized. It must not present original research. A claim that is likely to
be challenged requires a reference to a reliable source. Among Wikipedia
editors, this is often phrased as "verifiability, not truth" to express the idea
that the readers, not the encyclopedia, are ultimately responsible for checking
the truthfulness of the articles and making their own interpretations. This can
at times lead to the removal of information that is valid. Finally, Wikipedia
must not take sides. All opinions and viewpoints, if attributable to external
sources, must enjoy an appropriate share of coverage within an article. This is
known as neutral point of view (NPOV).

Wikipedia's initial anarchy integrated democratic and hierarchical elements over
time. An article is not considered to be owned by its creator or any other
editor and is not vetted by any recognized authority. Wikipedia's contributors
avoid a tragedy of the commons by internalizing benefits. They do this by
experiencing flow and identifying with and gaining status in the Wikipedia
community.

Editors in good standing in the community can run for one of many levels of
volunteer stewardship: this begins with "administrator", privileged users who
can delete pages, prevent articles from being changed in case of vandalism or
editorial disputes, and try to prevent certain persons from editing. Despite the
name, administrators are not supposed to enjoy any special privilege in
decision-making; instead, their powers are mostly limited to making edits that
have project-wide effects and thus are disallowed to ordinary editors, and to
implement restrictions intended to prevent certain persons from making
disruptive edits (such as vandalism).

Fewer editors become administrators than in years past, in part because the
process of vetting potential Wikipedia administrators has become more rigorous.

Bureaucrats name new administrators, solely upon the recommendations from the
community.

Wikipedians often have disputes regarding content, which may result in
repeatedly making opposite changes to an article, known as edit warring Over
time, Wikipedia has developed a semi-formal dispute resolution process to assist
in such circumstances. In order to determine community consensus, editors can
raise issues at appropriate community forums,[notes 7] or seek outside input
through third opinion requests or by initiating a more general community
discussion known as a request for comment.

The Arbitration Committee presides over the ultimate dispute resolution process.
Although disputes usually arise from a disagreement between two opposing views
on how an article should read, the Arbitration Committee explicitly refuses to
directly rule on the specific view that should be adopted. Statistical analyses
suggest that the committee ignores the content of disputes and rather focuses on
the way disputes are conducted, functioning not so much to resolve disputes and
make peace between conflicting editors, but to weed out problematic editors
while allowing potentially productive editors back in to participate. Therefore,
the committee does not dictate the content of articles, although it sometimes
condemns content changes when it deems the new content violates Wikipedia
policies (for example, if the new content is considered biased). Its remedies
include cautions and probations (used in 63% of cases) and banning editors from
articles (43%), subject matters (23%) or Wikipedia (16%). Complete bans from
Wikipedia are generally limited to instances of impersonation and anti-social
behavior. When conduct is not impersonation or anti-social, but rather
anti-consensus or in violation of editing policies, remedies tend to be limited
to warnings.

Each article and each user of Wikipedia has an associated "Talk" page. These
form the primary communication channel for editors to discuss, coordinate and
debate.

Wikipedia's community has been described as cult-like, although not always with
entirely negative connotations. The project's preference for cohesiveness, even
if it requires compromise that includes disregard of credentials, has been
referred to as "anti-elitism".

Wikipedians sometimes award one another virtual barnstars for good work. These
personalized tokens of appreciation reveal a wide range of valued work extending
far beyond simple editing to include social support, administrative actions, and
types of articulation work.

Wikipedia does not require that its editors and contributors provide
identification. As Wikipedia grew, "Who writes Wikipedia?" became one of the
questions frequently asked on the project. Jimmy Wales once argued that only "a
community ... a dedicated group of a few hundred volunteers" makes the bulk of
contributions to Wikipedia and that the project is therefore "much like any
traditional organization". In 2008, a Slate magazine article reported that:
"According to researchers in Palo Alto, 1 percent of Wikipedia users are
responsible for about half of the site's edits." This method of evaluating
contributions was later disputed by Aaron Swartz, who noted that several
articles he sampled had large portions of their content (measured by number of
characters) contributed by users with low edit counts.

The English Wikipedia has 5,358,144 articles, 30,452,787 registered editors, and
140,863 active editors. An editor is considered active if they have made one or
more edits in the past thirty days.

Editors who fail to comply with Wikipedia cultural rituals, such as signing talk
page comments, may implicitly signal that they are Wikipedia outsiders,
increasing the odds that Wikipedia insiders may target or discount their
contributions. Becoming a Wikipedia insider involves non-trivial costs: the
contributor is expected to learn Wikipedia-specific technological codes, submit
to a sometimes convoluted dispute resolution process, and learn a "baffling
culture rich with in-jokes and insider references". Editors who do not log in
are in some sense second-class citizens on Wikipedia, as "participants are
accredited by members of the wiki community, who have a vested interest in
preserving the quality of the work product, on the basis of their ongoing
participation", but the contribution histories of anonymous unregistered editors
recognized only by their IP addresses cannot be attributed to a particular
editor with certainty.

A 2007 study by researchers from Dartmouth College found that "anonymous and
infrequent contributors to Wikipedia […] are as reliable a source of knowledge
as those contributors who register with the site". Jimmy Wales stated in 2009
that "(I)t turns out over 50% of all the edits are done by just .7% of the
users... 524 people... And in fact the most active 2%, which is 1400 people,
have done 73.4% of all the edits." However, Business Insider editor and
journalist Henry Blodget showed in 2009 that in a random sample of articles,
most content in Wikipedia (measured by the amount of contributed text that
survives to the latest sampled edit) is created by "outsiders", while most
editing and formatting is done by "insiders".

A 2008 study found that Wikipedians were less agreeable, open, and conscientious
than others, although a later commentary pointed out serious flaws, including
that the data showed higher openness, that the differences with the control
group were small as were the samples. According to a 2009 study, there is
"evidence of growing resistance from the Wikipedia community to new content".

One study found that the contributor base to Wikipedia "was barely 13% women;
the average age of a contributor was in the mid-20s". A 2011 study by
researchers from the University of Minnesota found that females comprised 16.1%
of the 38,497 editors who started editing Wikipedia during 2009. In a January
2011 New York Times article, Noam Cohen observed that just 13% of Wikipedia's
contributors are female according to a 2008 Wikimedia Foundation survey. Sue
Gardner, a former executive director of the Wikimedia Foundation, hoped to see
female contributions increase to 25% by 2015. Linda Basch, president of the
National Council for Research on Women, noted the contrast in these Wikipedia
editor statistics with the percentage of women currently completing bachelor's
degrees, master's degrees and PhD programs in the United States (all at rates of
50 percent or greater).

In response, various universities have hosted edit-a-thons to encourage more
women to participate in the Wikipedia community. In fall 2013, 15 colleges and
universities — including Yale, Brown, and Pennsylvania State — offered college
credit for students to "write feminist thinking" about technology into
Wikipedia. Estimates of the diversity of contributors by educational level have
indicated that sixty-two percent of Wikipedia's editors are at the high school
and undergraduate college level of education.

In August 2014, Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales said in a BBC interview that
the Wikimedia Foundation was "... really doubling down our efforts ..." to reach
25% of female editors (originally targeted by 2015), since the Foundation had
"totally failed" so far. Wales said "a lot of things need to happen ... a lot of
outreach, a lot of software changes". Andrew Lih writing in the New York Times
was quoted by Bloomberg News in December 2016 as supporting Wales comments
concerning shortfalls in Wikipedia's outreach to female editors. Lih states his
concern with the question indicating that: "How can you get people to
participate in an (editing) environment that feels unsafe, where identifying
yourself as a woman, as a feminist, could open you up to ugly, intimidating
behavior".

There are currently 295 language editions of Wikipedia (also called language
versions, or simply Wikipedias). Thirteen of these have over one million
articles each (English, Swedish, Cebuano, German, Dutch, French, Russian,
Italian, Spanish, Waray-Waray, Polish, Vietnamese and Japanese), five more have
over 500,000 articles (Portuguese, Chinese, Ukrainian, Catalan and Persian), 40
more have over 100,000 articles, and 77 more have over 10,000 articles. The
largest, the English Wikipedia, has over 5.3 million articles. As of January
2017[update], according to Alexa, the English subdomain (en.wikipedia.org;
English Wikipedia) receives approximately 55% of Wikipedia's cumulative traffic,
with the remaining split among the other languages (Russian: 9%; Japanese: 7%;
Spanish: 6%; French: 4%). As of March 2017, the six largest language editions
are (in order of article count) the English, Cebuano, Swedish, German, Dutch,
and French Wikipedias.

Since Wikipedia is based on the Web and therefore worldwide, contributors to the
same language edition may use different dialects or may come from different
countries (as is the case for the English edition). These differences may lead
to some conflicts over spelling differences (e.g. colour versus color) or points
of view.

Though the various language editions are held to global policies such as
"neutral point of view", they diverge on some points of policy and practice,
most notably on whether images that are not licensed freely may be used under a
claim of fair use.

Jimmy Wales has described Wikipedia as "an effort to create and distribute a
free encyclopedia of the highest possible quality to every single person on the
planet in their own language". Though each language edition functions more or
less independently, some efforts are made to supervise them all. They are
coordinated in part by Meta-Wiki, the Wikimedia Foundation's wiki devoted to
maintaining all of its projects (Wikipedia and others). For instance, Meta-Wiki
provides important statistics on all language editions of Wikipedia, and it
maintains a list of articles every Wikipedia should have. The list concerns
basic content by subject: biography, history, geography, society, culture,
science, technology, and mathematics. As for the rest, it is not rare for
articles strongly related to a particular language not to have counterparts in
another edition. For example, articles about small towns in the United States
might only be available in English, even when they meet notability criteria of
other language Wikipedia projects.

Translated articles represent only a small portion of articles in most editions,
in part because fully automated translation of articles is disallowed. Articles
available in more than one language may offer "interwiki links", which link to
the counterpart articles in other editions.

A study published by PLOS ONE in 2012 also estimated the share of contributions
to different editions of Wikipedia from different regions of the world. It
reported that the proportion of the edits made from North America was 51% for
the English Wikipedia, and 25% for the simple English Wikipedia. The Wikimedia
Foundation hopes to increase the number of editors in the Global South to
thirty-seven percent by 2015.

On March 1, 2014, The Economist in an article titled "The Future of Wikipedia"
cited a trend analysis concerning data published by Wikimedia stating that: "The
number of editors for the English-language version has fallen by a third in
seven years." The attrition rate for active editors in English Wikipedia was
cited by The Economist as substantially in contrast to statistics for Wikipedia
in other languages (non-English Wikipedia). The Economist reported that the
number of contributors with an average of five of more edits per month was
relatively constant since 2008 for Wikipedia in other languages at approximately
42,000 editors within narrow seasonal variances of about 2,000 editors up or
down. The attrition rates for editors in English Wikipedia, by sharp comparison,
were cited as peaking in 2007 at approximately 50,000 editors which has dropped
to 30,000 editors as of the start of 2014. At the quoted trend rate, the number
of active editors in English Wikipedia has lost approximately 20,000 editors to
attrition since 2007, and the documented trend rate indicates the loss of
another 20,000 editors by 2021, down to 10,000 active editors on English
Wikipedia by 2021 if left unabated. Given that the trend analysis published in
The Economist presents the number of active editors for Wikipedia in other
languages (non-English Wikipedia) as remaining relatively constant and
successful in sustaining its numbers at approximately 42,000 active editors, the
contrast has pointed to the effectiveness of Wikipedia in other languages to
retain its active editors on a renewable and sustained basis. No comment was
made concerning which of the differentiated edit policy standards from Wikipedia
in other languages (non-English Wikipedia) would provide a possible alternative
to English Wikipedia for effectively ameliorating substantial editor attrition
rates on the English language Wikipedia.

Several Wikipedians have criticized Wikipedia's large and growing regulation,
which includes over 50 policies and nearly 150,000 words as of 2014[update].

Critics have stated that Wikipedia exhibits systemic bias. Columnist and
journalist Edwin Black criticizes Wikipedia for being a mixture of "truth, half
truth, and some falsehoods". Articles in The Chronicle of Higher Education and
The Journal of Academic Librarianship have criticized Wikipedia's Undue Weight
policy, concluding that the fact that Wikipedia explicitly is not designed to
provide correct information about a subject, but rather focus on all the major
viewpoints on the subject and give less attention to minor ones, creates
omissions that can lead to false beliefs based on incomplete information.

Journalists Oliver Kamm and Edwin Black noted how articles are dominated by the
loudest and most persistent voices, usually by a group with an "ax to grind" on
the topic. An article in Education Next Journal concluded that as a resource
about controversial topics, Wikipedia is notoriously subject to manipulation and
spin.

In 2006, the Wikipedia Watch criticism website listed dozens of examples of
plagiarism in the English Wikipedia.

Articles for traditional encyclopedias such as Encyclopædia Britannica are
carefully and deliberately written by experts, lending such encyclopedias a
reputation for accuracy. Conversely, Wikipedia is often cited for factual
inaccuracies and misrepresentations. However, a peer review in 2005 of forty-two
scientific entries on both Wikipedia and Encyclopædia Britannica by the science
journal Nature found few differences in accuracy, and concluded that "the
average science entry in Wikipedia contained around four inaccuracies;
Britannica, about three." Reagle suggested that while the study reflects "a
topical strength of Wikipedia contributors" in science articles, "Wikipedia may
not have fared so well using a random sampling of articles or on humanities
subjects." The findings by Nature were disputed by Encyclopædia Britannica, and
in response, Nature gave a rebuttal of the points raised by Britannica. In
addition to the point-for-point disagreement between these two parties, others
have examined the sample size and selection method used in the Nature effort,
and suggested a "flawed study design" (in Nature's manual selection of articles,
in part or in whole, for comparison), absence of statistical analysis (e.g., of
reported confidence intervals), and a lack of study "statistical power" (i.e.,
owing to small sample size, 42 or 4 x 101 articles compared, vs >105 and >106
set sizes for Britannica and the English Wikipedia, respectively).

As a consequence of the open structure, Wikipedia "makes no guarantee of
validity" of its content, since no one is ultimately responsible for any claims
appearing in it. Concerns have been raised by PC World in 2009 regarding the
lack of accountability that results from users' anonymity, the insertion of
false information, vandalism, and similar problems.

Economist Tyler Cowen wrote: "If I had to guess whether Wikipedia or the median
refereed journal article on economics was more likely to be true, after a not so
long think I would opt for Wikipedia." He comments that some traditional sources
of non-fiction suffer from systemic biases and novel results, in his opinion,
are over-reported in journal articles and relevant information is omitted from
news reports. However, he also cautions that errors are frequently found on
Internet sites, and that academics and experts must be vigilant in correcting
them.

Critics argue that Wikipedia's open nature and a lack of proper sources for most
of the information makes it unreliable. Some commentators suggest that Wikipedia
may be reliable, but that the reliability of any given article is not clear.
Editors of traditional reference works such as the Encyclopædia Britannica have
questioned the project's utility and status as an encyclopedia.

Wikipedia's open structure inherently makes it an easy target for Internet
trolls, spammers, and various forms of paid advocacy seen as counterproductive
to the maintenance of a neutral and verifiable online encyclopedia. In response
to paid advocacy editing and undisclosed editing issues, Wikipedia was reported
in an article by Jeff Elder in The Wall Street Journal on June 16, 2014, to have
strengthened its rules and laws against undisclosed editing. The article stated
that: "Beginning Monday [from date of article], changes in Wikipedia's terms of
use will require anyone paid to edit articles to disclose that arrangement.
Katherine Maher, the nonprofit Wikimedia Foundation's chief communications
officer, said the changes address a sentiment among volunteer editors that,
'we're not an advertising service; we're an encyclopedia.'" These issues, among
others, had been parodied since the first decade of Wikipedia, notably by
Stephen Colbert on The Colbert Report.

Most university lecturers discourage students from citing any encyclopedia in
academic work, preferring primary sources; some specifically prohibit Wikipedia
citations. Wales stresses that encyclopedias of any type are not usually
appropriate to use as citeable sources, and should not be relied upon as
authoritative. Wales once (2006 or earlier) said he receives about ten emails
weekly from students saying they got failing grades on papers because they cited
Wikipedia; he told the students they got what they deserved. "For God's sake,
you're in college; don't cite the encyclopedia", he said.

In February 2007, an article in The Harvard Crimson newspaper reported that a
few of the professors at Harvard University were including Wikipedia articles in
their syllabi, although without realizing the articles might change. In June
2007, former president of the American Library Association Michael Gorman
condemned Wikipedia, along with Google, stating that academics who endorse the
use of Wikipedia are "the intellectual equivalent of a dietitian who recommends
a steady diet of Big Macs with everything".

A Harvard law textbook, Legal Research in a Nutshell (2011), cites Wikipedia as
a "general source" that "can be a real boon" in "coming up to speed in the law
governing a situation" and, "while not authoritative, can provide basic facts as
well as leads to more in-depth resources".

On March 5, 2014, Julie Beck writing for The Atlantic magazine in an article
titled "Doctors' #1 Source for Healthcare Information: Wikipedia", stated that
"Fifty percent of physicians look up conditions on the (Wikipedia) site, and
some are editing articles themselves to improve the quality of available
information." Beck continued to detail in this article new programs of Dr. Amin
Azzam at the University of San Francisco to offer medical school courses to
medical students for learning to edit and improve Wikipedia articles on
health-related issues, as well as internal quality control programs within
Wikipedia organized by Dr. James Heilman to improve a group of 200
health-related articles of central medical importance up to Wikipedia's highest
standard of articles using its Featured Article and Good Article peer review
evaluation process. In a May 7, 2014, follow-up article in The Atlantic titled
"Can Wikipedia Ever Be a Definitive Medical Text?", Julie Beck quotes
Wikiproject Medicine's Dr. James Heilman as stating: "Just because a reference
is peer-reviewed doesn't mean it's a high-quality reference." Beck added that:
"Wikipedia has its own peer review process before articles can be classified as
'good' or 'featured.' Heilman, who has participated in that process before, says
'less than 1 percent' of Wikipedia's medical articles have passed.

In 2008, researchers at Carnegie Mellon University found that the quality of a
Wikipedia article would suffer rather than gain from adding more writers when
the article lacked appropriate explicit or implicit coordination. For instance,
when contributors rewrite small portions of an entry rather than making
full-length revisions, high- and low-quality content may be intermingled within
an entry. Roy Rosenzweig, a history professor, stated that American National
Biography Online outperformed Wikipedia in terms of its "clear and engaging
prose", which, he said, was an important aspect of good historical writing.
Contrasting Wikipedia's treatment of Abraham Lincoln to that of Civil War
historian James McPherson in American National Biography Online, he said that
both were essentially accurate and covered the major episodes in Lincoln's life,
but praised "McPherson's richer contextualization […] his artful use of
quotations to capture Lincoln's voice […] and […] his ability to convey a
profound message in a handful of words." By contrast, he gives an example of
Wikipedia's prose that he finds "both verbose and dull". Rosenzweig also
criticized the "waffling—encouraged by the NPOV policy—[which] means that it is
hard to discern any overall interpretive stance in Wikipedia history". By
example, he quoted the conclusion of Wikipedia's article on William Clarke
Quantrill. While generally praising the article, he pointed out its "waffling"
conclusion: "Some historians […] remember him as an opportunistic, bloodthirsty
outlaw, while others continue to view him as a daring soldier and local folk
hero."

Other critics have made similar charges that, even if Wikipedia articles are
factually accurate, they are often written in a poor, almost unreadable style.
Frequent Wikipedia critic Andrew Orlowski commented: "Even when a Wikipedia
entry is 100 per cent factually correct, and those facts have been carefully
chosen, it all too often reads as if it has been translated from one language to
another then into to a third, passing an illiterate translator at each stage." A
study of Wikipedia articles on cancer was conducted in 2010 by Yaacov Lawrence
of the Kimmel Cancer Center at Thomas Jefferson University. The study was
limited to those articles that could be found in the Physician Data Query and
excluded those written at the "start" class or "stub" class level. Lawrence
found the articles accurate but not very readable, and thought that "Wikipedia's
lack of readability (to non-college readers) may reflect its varied origins and
haphazard editing". The Economist argued that better-written articles tend to be
more reliable: "inelegant or ranting prose usually reflects muddled thoughts and
incomplete information".

Wikipedia seeks to create a summary of all human knowledge in the form of an
online encyclopedia, with each topic covered encyclopedically in one article.
Since it has terabytes of disk space, it can have far more topics than can be
covered by any printed encyclopedia. The exact degree and manner of coverage on
Wikipedia is under constant review by its editors, and disagreements are not
uncommon (see deletionism and inclusionism). Wikipedia contains materials that
some people may find objectionable, offensive, or pornographic because Wikipedia
is not censored. The policy has sometimes proved controversial: in 2008,
Wikipedia rejected an online petition against the inclusion of images of
Muhammad in the English edition of its Muhammad article, citing this policy. The
presence of politically, religiously, and pornographically sensitive materials
in Wikipedia has led to the censorship of Wikipedia by national authorities in
China, Pakistan, and the United Kingdom, among other countries.

A 2008 study conducted by researchers at Carnegie Mellon University and Palo
Alto Research Center gave a distribution of topics as well as growth (from July
2006 to January 2008) in each field:

These numbers refer only to the quantity of articles: it is possible for one
topic to contain a large number of short articles and another to contain a small
number of large ones. Through its "Wikipedia Loves Libraries" program, Wikipedia
has partnered with major public libraries such as the New York Public Library
for the Performing Arts to expand its coverage of underrepresented subjects and
articles.

A 2011 study conducted by researchers at the University of Minnesota indicated
that male and female editors focus on different coverage topics. There was a
greater concentration of females in the People and Arts category, while males
focus more on Geography and Science.

Research conducted by Mark Graham of the Oxford Internet Institute in 2009
indicated that the geographic distribution of article topics is highly uneven.
Africa is most underrepresented.

An editorial in The Guardian in 2014 noted that women porn stars are better
covered than women writers as a further example.

When multiple editors contribute to one topic or set of topics, systemic bias
may arise, due to the demographic backgrounds of the editors. In 2011, Wales
noted that the unevenness of coverage is a reflection of the demography of the
editors, which predominantly consists of young males with high education levels
in the developed world (cf. previously). The October 22, 2013 essay by Tom
Simonite in MIT's Technology Review titled "The Decline of Wikipedia" discussed
the effect of systemic bias and policy creep on the downward trend in the number
of editors.

Systemic bias on Wikipedia may follow that of culture generally, for example
favoring certain nationalities, ethnicities or majority religions. It may more
specifically follow the biases of Internet culture, inclining to being young,
male, English-speaking, educated, technologically aware, and wealthy enough to
spare time for editing. Biases of its own may include over-emphasis on topics
such as pop culture, technology, and current events.

Taha Yasseri of the University of Oxford, in 2013, studied the statistical
trends of systemic bias at Wikipedia introduced by editing conflicts and their
resolution. His research examined the counterproductive work behavior of edit
warring. Yasseri contended that simple reverts or "undo" operations were not the
most significant measure of counterproductive behavior at Wikipedia and relied
instead on the statistical measurement of detecting "reverting/reverted pairs"
or "mutually reverting edit pairs". Such a "mutually reverting edit pair" is
defined where one editor reverts the edit of another editor who then, in
sequence, returns to revert the first editor in the "mutually reverting edit
pairs". The results were tabulated for several language versions of Wikipedia.
The English Wikipedia's three largest conflict rates belonged to the articles
George W. Bush, Anarchism and Muhammad. By comparison, for the German Wikipedia,
the three largest conflict rates at the time of the Oxford study were for the
articles covering (i) Croatia, (ii) Scientology and (iii) 9/11 conspiracy
theories.

Researchers from the Washington University developed a statistical model to
measure systematic bias in the behavior of Wikipedia's users regarding
controversial topics. The authors focused on behavioral changes of the
encyclopedia's administrators after assuming the post, writing that systematic
bias occurred after the fact.

Dimitra Kessenides, writing for Bloomberg News Weekly, identified the
'filter-bubble' problem as a recurrent and long-standing issue at Wikipedia. As
Kessenides states: "If the only way to get an article about the developing world
published on Wikipedia was to know a former board member, it was hard to imagine
how a random editor in Johannesburg or Bangalore would have any hope... This
so-called filter-bubble problem, coined by Eli Pariser, co-founder of the viral
video site Upworthy, is the idea that the internet can contribute to the
insularity of certain communities. Filter bubbles have been blamed for the
spread of misinformation during the 2016 presidential election and for the
failure of pundits in the U.K. to anticipate Brexit... Wikipedia's filter-bubble
problem is a particularly acute threat for an organization whose stated mission
is 'to empower and engage people around the world.'"

Wikipedia has been criticized for allowing information of graphic content.
Articles depicting arguably objectionable content (such as Feces, Cadaver, Human
penis, Vulva, and Nudity) contain graphic pictures and detailed information
easily available to anyone with access to the internet, including children.

The site also includes sexual content such as images and videos of masturbation
and ejaculation, photographs of nude children, illustrations of zoophilia, and
photos from hardcore pornographic films in its articles.

The Wikipedia article about Virgin Killer—a 1976 album from German heavy metal
band Scorpions—features a picture of the album's original cover, which depicts a
naked prepubescent girl. The original release cover caused controversy and was
replaced in some countries. In December 2008, access to the Wikipedia article
Virgin Killer was blocked for four days by most Internet service providers in
the United Kingdom after it was reported by a member of the public as child
pornography, to the Internet Watch Foundation (IWF), which issues a stop list to
Internet service providers. IWF, a non-profit, non-government-affiliated
organization, later criticized the inclusion of the picture as "distasteful".

In April 2010, Sanger wrote a letter to the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
outlining his concerns that two categories of images on Wikimedia Commons
contained child pornography, and were in violation of US federal obscenity law.
Sanger later clarified that the images, which were related to pedophilia and one
about lolicon, were not of real children, but said that they constituted
"obscene visual representations of the sexual abuse of children", under the
PROTECT Act of 2003. That law bans photographic child pornography and cartoon
images and drawings of children that are obscene under American law. Sanger also
expressed concerns about access to the images on Wikipedia in schools. Wikimedia
Foundation spokesman Jay Walsh strongly rejected Sanger's accusation, saying
that Wikipedia did not have "material we would deem to be illegal. If we did, we
would remove it." Following the complaint by Sanger, Wales deleted sexual images
without consulting the community. After some editors who volunteer to maintain
the site argued that the decision to delete had been made hastily, Wales
voluntarily gave up some of the powers he had held up to that time as part of
his co-founder status. He wrote in a message to the Wikimedia Foundation
mailing-list that this action was "in the interest of encouraging this
discussion to be about real philosophical/content issues, rather than be about
me and how quickly I acted". Critics, including Wikipediocracy, noticed that
many of the pornographic images deleted from Wikipedia since 2010 have
reappeared.

One privacy concern in the case of Wikipedia is the right of a private citizen
to remain a "private citizen" rather than a "public figure" in the eyes of the
law.[notes 8] It is a battle between the right to be anonymous in cyberspace and
the right to be anonymous in real life ("meatspace"). A particular problem
occurs in the case of an individual who is relatively unimportant and for whom
there exists a Wikipedia page against her or his wishes.

In January 2006, a German court ordered the German Wikipedia shut down within
Germany because it stated the full name of Boris Floricic, aka "Tron", a
deceased hacker. On February 9, 2006, the injunction against Wikimedia
Deutschland was overturned, with the court rejecting the notion that Tron's
right to privacy or that of his parents was being violated.

Wikipedia has a "Volunteer Response Team" that uses the OTRS system to handle
queries without having to reveal the identities of the involved parties. This is
used, for example, in confirming the permission for using individual images and
other media in the project.

Wikipedia has been described as harboring a battleground culture of sexism and
harassment. The perceived toxic attitudes and tolerance of violent and abusive
language are also reasons put forth for the gender gap in Wikipedia editors. In
2014, a female editor who requested a separate space on Wikipedia to discuss
improving civility had her proposal referred to by a male editor using the words
"the easiest way to avoid being called a cunt is not to act like one."

A group of Wikipedia editors may form a WikiProject to focus their work on a
specific topic area, using its associated discussion page to coordinate changes
across multiple articles.

Wikipedia is hosted and funded by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit
organization which also operates Wikipedia-related projects such as Wiktionary
and Wikibooks. The foundation relies on public contributions and grants to fund
its mission. The foundation's 2013 IRS Form 990 shows revenue of $39.7 million
and expenses of almost $29 million, with assets of $37.2 million and liabilities
of about $2.3 million.

In May 2014, Wikimedia Foundation named Lila Tretikov as its second executive
director, taking over for Sue Gardner. The Wall Street Journal reported on May
1, 2014, that Tretikov's information technology background from her years at
University of California offers Wikipedia an opportunity to develop in more
concentrated directions guided by her often repeated position statement that,
"Information, like air, wants to be free." The same Wall Street Journal article
reported these directions of development according to an interview with
spokesman Jay Walsh of Wikimedia, who "said Tretikov would address that issue
(paid advocacy) as a priority. 'We are really pushing toward more
transparency... We are reinforcing that paid advocacy is not welcome.'
Initiatives to involve greater diversity of contributors, better mobile support
of Wikipedia, new geo-location tools to find local content more easily, and more
tools for users in the second and third world are also priorities, Walsh said."

Following the departure of Tretikov from Wikipedia due to issues concerning the
use of the "superprotection" feature which some language versions of Wikipedia
have adopted, Katherine Maher became the third executive director the Wikimedia
Foundation in June 2016. Maher has stated that one of her priorities would be
the issue of editor harassment endemic to Wikipedia as identified by the
Wikipedia board in December. Maher stated regarding the harassment issue that:
"It establishes a sense within the community that this is a priority... (and
that correction requires that) it has to be more than words."

Wikipedia is also supported by many organizations and groups that are affiliated
with the Wikimedia Foundation but independently-run, called Wikimedia movement
affiliates. These include Wikimedia chapters (which are national or sub-national
organizations, such as Wikimedia Deutschland and Wikimédia France), thematic
organizations (such as Amical Wikimedia for the Catalan language community), and
user groups. These affiliates participate in the promotion, development, and
funding of Wikipedia.

The operation of Wikipedia depends on MediaWiki, a custom-made, free and open
source wiki software platform written in PHP and built upon the MySQL database
system. The software incorporates programming features such as a macro language,
variables, a transclusion system for templates, and URL redirection. MediaWiki
is licensed under the GNU General Public License and it is used by all Wikimedia
projects, as well as many other wiki projects. Originally, Wikipedia ran on
UseModWiki written in Perl by Clifford Adams (Phase I), which initially required
CamelCase for article hyperlinks; the present double bracket style was
incorporated later. Starting in January 2002 (Phase II), Wikipedia began running
on a PHP wiki engine with a MySQL database; this software was custom-made for
Wikipedia by Magnus Manske. The Phase II software was repeatedly modified to
accommodate the exponentially increasing demand. In July 2002 (Phase III),
Wikipedia shifted to the third-generation software, MediaWiki, originally
written by Lee Daniel Crocker.

Several MediaWiki extensions are installed to extend the functionality of the
MediaWiki software.

In April 2005, a Lucene extension was added to MediaWiki's built-in search and
Wikipedia switched from MySQL to Lucene for searching. The site currently uses
Lucene Search 2.1,[needs update] which is written in Java and based on Lucene
library 2.3.

In July 2013, after extensive beta testing, a WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You
Get) extension, VisualEditor, was opened to public use. It was met with much
rejection and criticism, and was described as "slow and buggy". The feature was
changed from opt-out to opt-in afterward.

Computer programs called bots have been used widely to perform simple and
repetitive tasks, such as correcting common misspellings and stylistic issues,
or to start articles such as geography entries in a standard format from
statistical data. One controversial contributor massively creating articles with
his bot was reported to create up to ten thousand articles on the Swedish
Wikipedia on certain days. There are also some bots designed to automatically
notify editors when they make common editing errors (such as unmatched quotes or
unmatched parenthesis). Edits misidentified by a bot as the work of a banned
editor can be restored by other editors. An anti-vandal bot tries to detect and
revert vandalism quickly and automatically. Bots can also report edits from
particular accounts or IP address ranges, as was done at the time of the MH17
jet downing incident in July 2014. Bots on Wikipedia must be approved prior to
activation.

According to Andrew Lih, the current expansion of Wikipedia to millions of
articles would be difficult to envision without the use of such bots.

A "WikiProject" is a group of contributors who want to work together as a team
to improve Wikipedia. These groups often focus on a specific topic area (for
example, women's history), a specific location or a specific kind of task (for
example, checking newly created pages). The English Wikipedia currently has over
2,000 WikiProjects and activity varies.

In 2007, in preparation for producing a print version, the English Wikipedia
introduced an assessment scale of the quality of articles. Articles are rated by
WikiProjects. The range of quality classes begins with "Stub" (very short
pages), followed by "Start", "C" and "B" (in increasing order of quality).
Community peer review is needed for the article to enter one of the highest
quality classes: either "A", "good article" or the highest, "featured article".
Of the about 4.4 million articles and lists assessed as of March 2015, a little
more than 5,000 (0.12%) are featured articles, and fewer than 2,000 (0.04%) are
featured lists. One featured article per day, as selected by editors, appears on
the main page of Wikipedia.

The Wikipedia Version 1.0 Editorial Team has developed a table (shown below)
that displays data of all rated articles by quality and importance, on the
English Wikipedia. If an article or list receives different ratings by two or
more WikiProjects, then the highest rating is used in the table, pie-charts, and
bar-chart. The software regularly auto-updates the data.

Researcher Giacomo Poderi found that articles tend to reach featured status via
the intensive work of a few editors. A 2010 study found unevenness in quality
among featured articles and concluded that the community process is ineffective
in assessing the quality of articles.

[Note: The table above (prepared by the Wikipedia Version 1.0 Editorial Team) is
automatically updated daily by User:WP 1.0 bot, but the bar-chart and the two
pie-charts are not auto-updated. In them, new data has to be entered by a
Wikipedia editor (i.e. user).]

Wikipedia receives between 25,000 and 60,000 page requests per second, depending
on time of day. As of 2008[update] page requests are first passed to a front-end
layer of Squid caching servers.[needs update] Further statistics, based on a
publicly available 3-month Wikipedia access trace, are available. Requests that
cannot be served from the Squid cache are sent to load-balancing servers running
the Linux Virtual Server software, which in turn pass them to one of the Apache
web servers for page rendering from the database. The web servers deliver pages
as requested, performing page rendering for all the language editions of
Wikipedia. To increase speed further, rendered pages are cached in a distributed
memory cache until invalidated, allowing page rendering to be skipped entirely
for most common page accesses.

Wikipedia currently runs on dedicated clusters of Linux servers (mainly Ubuntu).
As of December 2009[update], there were 300 in Florida and 44 in Amsterdam. By
January 22, 2013, Wikipedia had migrated its primary data center to an Equinix
facility in Ashburn, Virginia.

In accordance with growing amounts of incoming donations exceeding seven digits
in 2013 as recently reported, the Foundation has reached a threshold of assets
which qualify its consideration under the principles of industrial organization
economics to indicate the need for the re-investment of donations into the
internal research and development of the Foundation. Two of the recent projects
of such internal research and development have been the creation of a Visual
Editor and a largely under-utilized "Thank" tab which were developed for the
purpose of ameliorating issues of editor attrition, which have met with limited
success. The estimates for reinvestment by industrial organizations into
internal research and development was studied by Adam Jaffe, who recorded that
the range of 4% to 25% annually was to be recommended, with high end technology
requiring the higher level of support for internal reinvestment. At the 2013
level of contributions for Wikimedia presently documented as 45 million dollars,
the computed budget level recommended by Jaffe and Caballero for reinvestment
into internal research and development is between 1.8 million and 11.3 million
dollars annually. In 2016, the level of contributions were reported by Blomberg
News as being at $77 million annually, updating the Jaffe estimates for the
higher level of support to between 3.08 million and 19.2 million dollars
annually.

Community-produced news publications include the English Wikipedia's The
Signpost, founded in 2005 by Michael Snow, an attorney, Wikipedia administrator
and former chair of the Wikimedia Foundation board of trustees. It covers news
and events from the site, as well as major events from other Wikimedia projects,
such as Wikimedia Commons. Similar publications are the German-language Kurier,
and the Portuguese-language Correio da Wikipédia. Other past and present
community news publications on English Wikipedia include the "Wikiworld" web
comic, the Wikipedia Weekly podcast, and newsletters of specific WikiProjects
like The Bugle from WikiProject Military History and the monthly newsletter from
The Guild of Copy Editors. There are also a number of publications from the
Wikimedia Foundation and multilingual publications such as the Wikimedia Blog
and This Month in Education.

When the project was started in 2001, all text in Wikipedia was covered by the
GNU Free Documentation License (GFDL), a copyleft license permitting the
redistribution, creation of derivative works, and commercial use of content
while authors retain copyright of their work. The GFDL was created for software
manuals that come with free software programs licensed under the GPL. This made
it a poor choice for a general reference work: for example, the GFDL requires
the reprints of materials from Wikipedia to come with a full copy of the GFDL
text. In December 2002, the Creative Commons license was released: it was
specifically designed for creative works in general, not just for software
manuals. The license gained popularity among bloggers and others distributing
creative works on the Web. The Wikipedia project sought the switch to the
Creative Commons. Because the two licenses, GFDL and Creative Commons, were
incompatible, in November 2008, following the request of the project, the Free
Software Foundation (FSF) released a new version of the GFDL designed
specifically to allow Wikipedia to relicense its content to CC BY-SA by August
1, 2009. (A new version of the GFDL automatically covers Wikipedia contents.) In
April 2009, Wikipedia and its sister projects held a community-wide referendum
which decided the switch in June 2009.

The handling of media files (e.g. image files) varies across language editions.
Some language editions, such as the English Wikipedia, include non-free image
files under fair use doctrine, while the others have opted not to, in part
because of the lack of fair use doctrines in their home countries (e.g. in
Japanese copyright law). Media files covered by free content licenses (e.g.
Creative Commons' CC BY-SA) are shared across language editions via Wikimedia
Commons repository, a project operated by the Wikimedia Foundation. Wikipedia's
accommodation of varying international copyright laws regarding images has led
some to observe that its photographic coverage of topics lags behind the quality
of the encyclopedic text.

The Wikimedia Foundation is not a licensor of content, but merely a hosting
service for the contributors (and licensors) of the Wikipedia. This position has
been successfully defended in court.

Obtaining the full contents of Wikipedia for reuse presents challenges, since
direct cloning via a web crawler is discouraged. Wikipedia publishes "dumps" of
its contents, but these are text-only; as of 2007[update] there was no dump
available of Wikipedia's images.

Several languages of Wikipedia also maintain a reference desk, where volunteers
answer questions from the general public. According to a study by Pnina Shachaf
in the Journal of Documentation, the quality of the Wikipedia reference desk is
comparable to a standard library reference desk, with an accuracy of 55%.

Wikipedia's original medium was for users to read and edit content using any
standard web browser through a fixed Internet connection. Although Wikipedia
content has been accessible through the mobile web since July 2013, The New York
Times on February 9, 2014, quoted Erik Möller, deputy director of the Wikimedia
Foundation, stating that the transition of internet traffic from desktops to
mobile devices was significant and a cause for concern and worry. The article in
The New York Times reported the comparison statistics for mobile edits stating
that, "Only 20 percent of the readership of the English-language Wikipedia comes
via mobile devices, a figure substantially lower than the percentage of mobile
traffic for other media sites, many of which approach 50 percent. And the shift
to mobile editing has lagged even more." The New York Times reports that Möller
has assigned "a team of 10 software developers focused on mobile", out of a
total of approximately 200 employees working at the Wikimedia Foundation. One
principal concern cited by The New York Times for the "worry" is for Wikipedia
to effectively address attrition issues with the number of editors which the
online encyclopedia attracts to edit and maintain its content in a mobile access
environment.

Bloomberg Businessweek reported in July 2014 that Google's Android mobile apps
have dominated the largest share of global smartphone shipments for 2013 with
78.6% of market share over their next closest competitor in iOS with 15.2% of
the market. At the time of the Tretikov appointment and her posted web interview
with Sue Gardner in May 2014, Wikimedia representatives made a technical
announcement concerning the number of mobile access systems in the market
seeking access to Wikipedia. Directly after the posted web interview, the
representatives stated that Wikimedia would be applying an all-inclusive
approach to accommodate as many mobile access systems as possible in its efforts
for expanding general mobile access, including BlackBerry and the Windows Phone
system, making market share a secondary issue. The latest version of the Android
app for Wikipedia was released on July 23, 2014, to generally positive reviews,
scoring over four of a possible five in a poll of approximately 200,000 users
downloading from Google. The latest version for iOS was released on April 3,
2013, to similar reviews.

Access to Wikipedia from mobile phones was possible as early as 2004, through
the Wireless Application Protocol (WAP), via the Wapedia service. In June 2007
Wikipedia launched en.mobile.wikipedia.org, an official website for wireless
devices. In 2009 a newer mobile service was officially released, located at
en.m.wikipedia.org, which caters to more advanced mobile devices such as the
iPhone, Android-based devices or WebOS-based devices. Several other methods of
mobile access to Wikipedia have emerged. Many devices and applications optimize
or enhance the display of Wikipedia content for mobile devices, while some also
incorporate additional features such as use of Wikipedia metadata (See
Wikipedia:Metadata), such as geoinformation.

Wikipedia Zero is an initiative of the Wikimedia Foundation to expand the reach
of the encyclopedia to the developing countries.

Andrew Lih and Andrew Brown both maintain editing Wikipedia with smart phones is
difficult and this discourages new potential contributors. Several years running
the number of Wikipedia editors has been falling and Tom Simonite of MIT
Technology Review claims the bureaucratic structure and rules are a factor in
this. Simonite alleges some Wikipedians use the labyrinthine rules and
guidelines to dominate others and those editors have a vested interest in
keeping the status quo. Lih alleges there is serious disagreement among existing
contributors how to resolve this. Lih fears for Wikipedia's long term future
while Brown fears problems with Wikipedia will remain and rival encyclopedias
will not replace it.

Wikipedia is extremely popular. In February 2014, The New York Times reported
that Wikipedia is ranked fifth globally among all websites, stating "With 18
billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors a month […] Wikipedia
trails just Yahoo, Facebook, Microsoft and Google, the largest with 1.2 billion
unique visitors."

In addition to logistic growth in the number of its articles, Wikipedia has
steadily gained status as a general reference website since its inception in
2001. About 50% of search engine traffic to Wikipedia comes from Google, a good
portion of which is related to academic research. The number of readers of
Wikipedia worldwide reached 365 million at the end of 2009. The Pew Internet and
American Life project found that one third of US Internet users consulted
Wikipedia. In 2011 Business Insider gave Wikipedia a valuation of $4 billion if
it ran advertisements.

According to "Wikipedia Readership Survey 2011", the average age of Wikipedia
readers is 36, with a rough parity between genders. Almost half of Wikipedia
readers visit the site more than five times a month, and a similar number of
readers specifically look for Wikipedia in search engine results. About 47% of
Wikipedia readers do not realize that Wikipedia is a non-profit organization.

Wikipedia's content has also been used in academic studies, books, conferences,
and court cases. The Parliament of Canada's website refers to Wikipedia's
article on same-sex marriage in the "related links" section of its "further
reading" list for the Civil Marriage Act. The encyclopedia's assertions are
increasingly used as a source by organizations such as the US federal courts and
the World Intellectual Property Organization – though mainly for supporting
information rather than information decisive to a case. Content appearing on
Wikipedia has also been cited as a source and referenced in some US intelligence
agency reports. In December 2008, the scientific journal RNA Biology launched a
new section for descriptions of families of RNA molecules and requires authors
who contribute to the section to also submit a draft article on the RNA family
for publication in Wikipedia.

Wikipedia has also been used as a source in journalism, often without
attribution, and several reporters have been dismissed for plagiarizing from
Wikipedia.

In 2006, Time magazine recognized Wikipedia's participation (along with YouTube,
Reddit, MySpace, and Facebook) in the rapid growth of online collaboration and
interaction by millions of people worldwide.

In July 2007 Wikipedia was the focus of a 30-minute documentary on BBC Radio 4
which argued that, with increased usage and awareness, the number of references
to Wikipedia in popular culture is such that the word is one of a select band of
21st-century nouns that are so familiar (Google, Facebook, YouTube) that they no
longer need explanation.

On September 28, 2007, Italian politician Franco Grillini raised a parliamentary
question with the minister of cultural resources and activities about the
necessity of freedom of panorama. He said that the lack of such freedom forced
Wikipedia, "the seventh most consulted website", to forbid all images of modern
Italian buildings and art, and claimed this was hugely damaging to tourist
revenues.

On September 16, 2007, The Washington Post reported that Wikipedia had become a
focal point in the 2008 US election campaign, saying: "Type a candidate's name
into Google, and among the first results is a Wikipedia page, making those
entries arguably as important as any ad in defining a candidate. Already, the
presidential entries are being edited, dissected and debated countless times
each day." An October 2007 Reuters article, titled "Wikipedia page the latest
status symbol", reported the recent phenomenon of how having a Wikipedia article
vindicates one's notability.

Active participation also has an impact. Law students have been assigned to
write Wikipedia articles as an exercise in clear and succinct writing for an
uninitiated audience.

A working group led by Peter Stone (formed as a part of the Stanford-based
project One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence) in its report called
Wikipedia "the best-known example of crowdsourcing... that far exceeds
traditionally-compiled information sources, such as encyclopedias and
dictionaries, in scale and depth."

Wikipedia won two major awards in May 2004. The first was a Golden Nica for
Digital Communities of the annual Prix Ars Electronica contest; this came with a
€10,000 (£6,588; $12,700) grant and an invitation to present at the PAE
Cyberarts Festival in Austria later that year. The second was a Judges' Webby
Award for the "community" category. Wikipedia was also nominated for a "Best
Practices" Webby award.

In 2007, readers of brandchannel.com voted Wikipedia as the fourth-highest brand
ranking, receiving 15% of the votes in answer to the question "Which brand had
the most impact on our lives in 2006?"

In September 2008, Wikipedia received Quadriga A Mission of Enlightenment award
of Werkstatt Deutschland along with Boris Tadić, Eckart Höfling, and Peter
Gabriel. The award was presented to Wales by David Weinberger.

In 2015, Wikipedia was awarded both the annual Erasmus Prize, which recognizes
exceptional contributions to culture, society or social sciences, and the
Spanish Princess of Asturias Award on International Cooperation. Speaking at the
Asturian Parliament in Oviedo, the city that hosts the awards ceremony, Jimmy
Wales praised the work of the Asturian language Wikipedia users. The night of
the ceremony, members of the Wikimedia Foundation held a meeting with
Wikipedians from all parts of Spain, including the local Asturian community.

Comedian Stephen Colbert has parodied or referenced Wikipedia on numerous
episodes of his show The Colbert Report and coined the related term wikiality,
meaning "together we can create a reality that we all agree on—the reality we
just agreed on". Another example can be found in "Wikipedia Celebrates 750 Years
of American Independence", a July 2006 front-page article in The Onion, as well
as the 2010 The Onion article "'L.A. Law' Wikipedia Page Viewed 874 Times
Today".

In an episode of the television comedy The Office U.S., which aired in April
2007, an incompetent office manager (Michael Scott) is shown relying on a
hypothetical Wikipedia article for information on negotiation tactics in order
to assist him in negotiating lesser pay for an employee. The tactics he used
failed, as a joke about the unreliability of Wikipedia and what anyone can do to
change its contents. Viewers of the show tried to add the episode's mention of
the page as a section of the actual Wikipedia article on negotiation, but this
effort was prevented by other users on the article's talk page.

"My Number One Doctor", a 2007 episode of the television show Scrubs, played on
the perception that Wikipedia is an unreliable reference tool with a scene in
which Dr. Perry Cox reacts to a patient who says that a Wikipedia article
indicates that the raw food diet reverses the effects of bone cancer by
retorting that the same editor who wrote that article also wrote the Battlestar
Galactica episode guide.

In 2008, the comedic website CollegeHumor produced a video sketch named
"Professor Wikipedia", in which the fictitious Professor Wikipedia instructs a
class with a medley of unverifiable and occasionally absurd statements.

The Dilbert comic strip from May 8, 2009, features a character supporting an
improbable claim by saying "Give me ten minutes and then check Wikipedia."

In July 2009, BBC Radio 4 broadcast a comedy series called Bigipedia, which was
set on a website which was a parody of Wikipedia. Some of the sketches were
directly inspired by Wikipedia and its articles.

In 2010, comedian Daniel Tosh encouraged viewers of his show, Tosh.0, to visit
the show's Wikipedia article and edit it at will. On a later episode, he
commented on the edits to the article, most of them offensive, which had been
made by the audience and had prompted the article to be locked from editing.

On August 23, 2013, the New Yorker website published a cartoon with this
caption: "Dammit, Manning, have you considered the pronoun war that this is
going to start on your Wikipedia page?"

In December 2015, John Julius Norwich stated, in a letter published in The Times
newspaper, that as an historian he resorted to Wikipedia "at least a dozen times
a day", and had never yet caught it out. He described it as "a work of reference
as useful as any in existence", with so wide a range that it is almost
impossible to find a person, place or thing that it has left uncovered, and that
he could never have written his last two books without it.

Wikipedia has also spawned several sister projects, which are also wikis run by
the Wikimedia Foundation. These other Wikimedia projects include Wiktionary, a
dictionary project launched in December 2002, Wikiquote, a collection of
quotations created a week after Wikimedia launched, Wikibooks, a collection of
collaboratively written free textbooks and annotated texts, Wikimedia Commons, a
site devoted to free-knowledge multimedia, Wikinews, for citizen journalism, and
Wikiversity, a project for the creation of free learning materials and the
provision of online learning activities. Of these, only Commons has had success
comparable to that of Wikipedia. Another sister project of Wikipedia,
Wikispecies, is a catalogue of species. In 2012 Wikivoyage, an editable travel
guide, and Wikidata, an editable knowledge base, launched.

The most obvious economic effect of Wikipedia has been the death of commercial
encyclopedias, especially the printed versions, e.g. Encyclopædia Britannica,
which were unable to compete with a product that is essentially free. Nicholas
Carr wrote a 2005 essay, "The amorality of Web 2.0", that criticized websites
with user-generated content, like Wikipedia, for possibly leading to
professional (and, in his view, superior) content producers' going out of
business, because "free trumps quality all the time". Carr wrote: "Implicit in
the ecstatic visions of Web 2.0 is the hegemony of the amateur. I for one can't
imagine anything more frightening." Others dispute the notion that Wikipedia, or
similar efforts, will entirely displace traditional publications. For instance,
Chris Anderson, the editor-in-chief of Wired Magazine, wrote in Nature that the
"wisdom of crowds" approach of Wikipedia will not displace top scientific
journals, with their rigorous peer review process.

There is also an ongoing debate about the influence of Wikipedia on the
biography publishing business. "The worry is that, if you can get all that
information from Wikipedia, what's left for biography?" said Kathryn Hughes,
professor of life writing at UEA and author of The Short Life and Long Times of
Mrs Beeton and George Eliot: the Last Victorian.

Wikipedia has seen been widely used as a corpus for linguistic research in
computational linguistics, information retrieval and natural language
processing. In particular, it commonly serves as a target knowledge base for the
entity linking problem, which is then called "wikification", and to the related
problem of word sense disambiguation. Methods similar to wikification can in
turn be used to find "missing" links in Wikipedia.

In 2015, French researchers Dr José Lages of the University of Franche-Comté in
Besançon and Dima Shepelyansky of Paul Sabatier University in Toulouse published
a global university ranking based on Wikipedia scholarly citations. They used
PageRank "followed by the number of appearances in the 24 different language
editions of Wikipedia (descending order) and the century in which they were
founded (ascending order)."

A number of interactive multimedia encyclopedias incorporating entries written
by the public existed long before Wikipedia was founded. The first of these was
the 1986 BBC Domesday Project, which included text (entered on BBC Micro
computers) and photographs from over 1 million contributors in the UK, and
covered the geography, art, and culture of the UK. This was the first
interactive multimedia encyclopedia (and was also the first major multimedia
document connected through internal links), with the majority of articles being
accessible through an interactive map of the UK. The user interface and part of
the content of the Domesday Project were emulated on a website until 2008.

Several free-content, collaborative encyclopedias were created around the same
period as Wikipedia (e.g. Everything2), with many later being merged into the
project (e.g. GNE). One of the most successful early online encyclopedias
incorporating entries by the public was h2g2, which was created by Douglas Adams
in 1999. The h2g2 encyclopedia is relatively light-hearted, focusing on articles
which are both witty and informative.

Subsequent collaborative knowledge websites have drawn inspiration from
Wikipedia. Some, such as Susning.nu, Enciclopedia Libre, Hudong, and Baidu Baike
likewise employ no formal review process, although some like Conservapedia are
not as open. Others use more traditional peer review, such as Encyclopedia of
Life and the online wiki encyclopedias Scholarpedia and Citizendium. The latter
was started by Sanger in an attempt to create a reliable alternative to
Wikipedia.



