https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fulfulde

Fulfulde walla pulaar maa pular ko ɗemngal Fulɓe e Haalpulaar'en. Ɗemngal ngal
no haalee e leyɗe keewɗe e Afirik. Haalooɓe fulfulde-pulaar ina kawra miliyonji
60 haa 80. Ɗemngal ngal ina jeyaa e suudu ɗemɗe Hiirnaange Atlantik, taweteendu
kanyum duu e nder suudu ɗemɗe afirikankeeje ɓurndu yaajude wi'eteendu
Niiser-Konngo. Ɗemɗe goɗɗe jeyaaɗe e ndun suudu ngoni: ce'aar (ɗemngal seereero)
e njolfo. E ɗeen ɗiɗi ko seereero ɓuri ɓadondirde e pulaar.

So en teskiima, ma en taw ina heddii fahin caltuɗe ɗalaaɗe hono pulaar Fulaadu
(ɓaleeri Senegal e Gammbiya), Fulfulde Borgu e nder leydi Benen, fulfulde
diiwaanuuji hakkunde Niiseriya. Kono ɗeen pulfule na ɓadii goɗɗe e ɗee ɗe
adi-ɗen limtude yeru Borgu no ɓadondiri e Maasina, Fulaadu no nanndi e Fuuta
Tooro no nanndi e Fuuta Jaloo, e maanaa no hakkunde maa fulfulde Caad walla
Sudan ko e Adamawa jeydi.

2. Alkule: gila teemedannde sappo e jeetataɓere nden, pulaar-fulfulde no
winndiree alkule aarabe. Haa hannde no fellitaa wonnde e leyɗe goɗɗe yeru Fuuta
Jaloo maa Adamawa Fulɓe ko alkule aarabe ɓuri doolnoraade. Kono gila hitaande
1966 bensondiral Bamako ngal fewjanno ɗemngal ngal mbinndudi tuugiindi e abajada
laten. Ndiin mbinndudi inndiraa abajada UNESCO maa alkule UNESCO. Alkule mayri
ngoni:

Sincugol ndiin mbinndudi ponndaandi haɗaali faa jooni Fulɓe ndonka fottude e
alkule yogaaje, e fiide misal Haal-Pulaar'en senegal wo ñ mbinndirta alkulal ny.
Fulɓe Mali e Gine nii mbinndirta ɗum: ɲ. Kadi lurre ina ngoodi to baŋŋe
winndugol alkule denndaaɗe (renndaaɗe) yeru ŋg (hade ng), ɗum e wonnde ndin
mbinndudi yamiranooka to bensondiral Bamako. Winndooɓe Gine woɓɓe mbinndan nb
hade mb jamiraaɗo Bamako oo.



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ngaluuji_leydi

Afganistan - Albania - Algeria - Almaany - Ameriik (ƴeewu Dowlaaji Dentuɗi) -
Andorra - Angola - Antigua and Barbuda - Argentina - Armenia - Australia -
Austria - Azerbaijan

Bahamas - Bahrain - Bangladesh - Barbados - Belarus - Belgium - Belize - Benin -
Bermuda - Bhutan - Bolivia - Bosnia and Herzegovina - Botswana - Brazil - Brunei
- Bulgaria - Burkina Faso - Myanmar (formerly Burma) - Burunndi

Cambodia - Central African Republic - Caadi - Ciile - People's Republic of China
- Republic of China (Taiwan) - Colombia - Comoros - Democratic Republic of the
Congo (formerly Zaire) - Republic of the Congo - Costa Rica - Croatia - Cuba -
Cyprus - Czech Republic

East Timor - Ecuador - Egypt - El Salvador - Equatorial Guinea - Eritrea -
Estonia - Ethiopia

Gabon - Gammbi - Georgia - Gana - Greece - Grenada - Guatemala - Gine -
Gine-Bisaawo - Guyana

Iceland - Republic of India (formerly as British Indian empire) - Indonesia -
Iran - Iraq - Ireland - Israel (formerly part of Palestine) - Italy

Kaapo Werde - Kamerun - Kanada - Kazakhstan - Kenya - Kiribati - Kodduwaar -
Korea - Korea, North - Korea, South - Kuwait - Kyrgyzstan

Laos - Latvia - Lebanon - Lesotho - Labiriyaa - Libya - Liechtenstein -
Lituwaniya - Luxembourg

Republic of Macedonia - Isle of Man - Madagascar - Malawi - Malaysia - Maldives
- Maali - Malta - Marshall Islands - Moritani - Mauritius - Mexico - Federated
States of Micronesia - Moldova - Monaco - Mongolia - Montenegro - Morocco -
Mozambique - Myanmar

Namibia - Nauru - Nepal - The Netherlands - New Zealand (Aotearoa) - Nicaragua -
Niger - Niiseriya - Niue - North Korea - Norway

Pakistan - Palau - Palestine (See "State of Palestine") - Panama - Papua New
Guinea - Paraguay - Peru - Philippines - Poloonya - Portugal - Puerto Rico

Saint Kitts and Nevis - Saint Lucia - Saint Vincent and the Grenadines - Samoa -
San Marino - São Tomé and Príncipe - Saudi Arabia - Senegal - Serbiya -
Seychelles - Sarliyon - Singapore - Slovakia - Slovenia - Solomon Islands -
Somalia - South Africa - South Korea - Spain - Sri Lanka - Sudan - Suriname -
Swaziland - Sweden - Switzerland - Syria

Taiwan (see Republic of China) - Tajikistan - Tanzania - Tatarstan - Thailand -
Togo - Tonga - Trinidad and Tobago - Tunisia - Turkey - Turkmenistan - Tuvalu

Uganda - Ukraine - United Arab Emirates - United Kingdom - United States of
America - Uruguay - Uzbekistan



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gine

Gine (e Fulfulde Maasina, Lagine; e faransiire République de Guinée) ko leydi e
Afirik Hirnaangeeri. Hindi kernidi e leyɗe ɗee ɗoo: Sarliyon, Labiriyaa,
Koddiwaar, Maali, Senegal e Gine-Bisaawo. Noone laamu mayri ko ndenndaandi (ko
wi'etee kadi repibliiki). Hooreejo leydi ndin ko Lansana Konte innetee, Hooreejo
guwerneman maa Permiyee Ministir on laatii Lansana Kuyaate gila lewru fabraa'ilu
2007 (caggal murtital jamaa on) haa 20 maayuhu 2008. On tuma Persidan Lansana
Konte itti Kuyaate watti Ahmadu Tijjaani Suwaare.

Kapital ngal, e maanaa laamorde nden, ko Konaakiri, ca'e mawɗe go'o ko wano
Kinndiyaa, Maamun, Labe, Kankan, Zerekore ekn. Mbertudi ndin ko 250.158 km²,
jamaa on no yona miliyonji 11,5 (2014) haa sappo (anndaaka tigi tigi sabu ko
ɗuuɗi e ɓiɓɓe Gine ɓen dogii leydi mun ndin). Gine laatino kalfaandi Faransi
ittude 1898 (hitaande nanngegol Almaami Saamori Tuuree) haa nyannde 2 ottoombur
1958, nyalaande hettaare Gine nden. Hooreejo leydi arano on ko Ahmed Seeku
Tuuree (1922-1984). Ɗemngal laamu ngal ko faransi, ɗemɗe leƴƴi leydi ndin ko
Sooso, Pular, Maninka, Kisi, Tooma, Berse, Konyagi, Basari, Bajaranke, Baagaa,
Lanndumaa ekn. kono ko ɗemɗe tati arane ɗen ɓuretee haaleede. Gine hino tawaa e
kawtite leyɗe wano ONU, CEDEAO, UA.

Maanditaare (anniversary) fayɓe waranooɓe nyannde 22 Siilo ɓen ɓadtike. Taw si
woodii ko waylii gila Lansana Kuyaate toɗɗaa hooreejo jaagorɓe ɓaawo nde
teemeɗɗe fayɓe waraa, waɗtaa haako nyaayaako? Gila Gine heɓti jeytaare e
hitaande 1958, Seeku Tuuree laamii, Ginenaaɓe woowti toonyeede waree, tawa hay
huunde suusaa ŋaanyaade. Seeku Tuuree wari ko wari koo fow, ɓurɓe ɓee ko Fulɓe
toonyanoo waraa, gila annduɓe rewi e marɓe faa e kelɗuɓe buy o wari, haa hannde
huunde hinyaaka, lirnyitaaka sakko goɗɗo nyaawee, maaɗum toonyaaɓe yoɓitee… Gila
Lansana Konte ƴetti laamu e hitaande 1984, kanko kadi o warii o toonyii
Ginenaaɓe heewɓe, fiikala (although) buy yejjitiino, walla yejinkinike. O lancii
cuuɗi e koɗanɗe teemeɗɗe Fulɓe e nder Konaakiri, o raɗike buy e leyɗeele mum’en,
tawa haa jooni huunde haalaaka… E lewru Korse (June), 2006, o imminiino
koninkooɓe makko, ɓe warii seppooɓe cappanɗe, hay huunde haalaaka fii ɗum ɗoo
kadi…Awa hay gooto nyaawaaka. Nde 22 Siilo (january), ndee ɗoo hitaande
fewndiinde, koninkooɓe Konte fellii warii hedde 230 fayɓe seppooɓe, haa jooni
bonnuɓe rewnaaka e laawol, tiindinee nunɗal… Taw si ɗum ɗoo fow accirte nih, jam
waaloo talloo?



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gine-Bisaawo

Gine-Bisaawo (pt. Guiné-Bissau, maa Gine Bisaawo, ko aldaa e pocal ngal) ko
leydi e Afirik Hirnaangeeri, keernundi e Gine (Konaakiri) ka funnaange e Senegal
ka nano. Senngo hiirnaangewo ngon no feewti e Baharu Atalantik maa Oseyan
Atilanti.

Mbertudi leydi ndin ko 36.120 km2, jamaa hoɗuɗo e mayri no hewtaynoo fewndo
hitaande 2014 yimɓe 1.693.398. Laamorde nden ko Bisaawo, 395.954 (2010). Leydi
ndin hino jogii suriije (duuɗe) wi'eteeɗe Bijaago. Ka taariika ka laamu Ngaabu,
jeyannongu e laamateeri Malle (Empire du Mali) ɓuri lollude. Portokeesuuɓe ɓen
adino jogaade daande maayo leydi ndin ɓe huutori ɗum e golleeji maɓɓe ngeeygu
jiyaaɓe ɓaleeɓe. Ko non ɓe naatiri seeɗa seeɗa e leydi ndin fow haa ɓe watti ndi
e ley karhankaaku maɓɓe. Hitaande 1956 fedde wi'eteende PAIGC (Fedde wonannde
hettaare Gine Bisaawo e Kaapo Werde) fuɗɗii cippiro ngon. Nyannde 24 sutaambar
ɓe noddi jeytal hoore leydi ndin. Hooreejo-leydi arano on laati Luis Cabral. E
nder hitaande 1980, caggal sokolaaji heewɗi e baŋŋe ngaluuji leydi, miniteeriiɓe
folli Cabral laamii. Ko João Bernardo Vieira laatinoo hooreejo maɓɓe haa kanko
kadi miniteeriijo go'o wi'eteeɗo Kummba Yala jaɓti laamu ngun e juuɗe makko.
Vieira dogi yahri Portokeesi. Fitina e jiiɓu-jaaɓu naati e leydi ndin. Kummba
Yala kadi follaa, rebeljo inneteeɗo Mane naati e murtaldu. Kono gila woote
sakkitiiɗe ɗen hitaande 2005 (ko João Bernardo Vieira ganyinoo ɗe) Gine Bisaawo
heɓtii deeƴere seeɗa.



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Labe

Labe ko saare mawnde e nder Fuuta Jaloo, Gine ko perefektiir kadi, e maanaa ko
noone diiwal. Labe no kerni to nano e perefektiir Maali, to hiirnaange Leelumaa,
to nyaamo Pita e Dalabaa, to funnaange Tuge e Kubiyaa. Saare nden ko komin, ko
heddii kon ko suuperefektiirji 12: Dalen, Tunturun, Sannun, Jonfo, Kaalan, Nusi,
Daara-Labe, Aafiya, Garammbe, Jaari, Kura-Manngi, Poopodara. Labe no jogii
hannde 280.000 yimɓe. Ka taariika, Labe ko e hitaande 1755 sincaa kono no gasa
ka tawee hoɗannde adiinde Labe nden no woodi gila laamateeri Gana maa Malle maa
ko adii ɗum. Innde nden ko e haala jalunke ittaa, e maanaa Labe ko hoɗannde
Jalunkeeɓe ka attorum kono taariika on ko Karamoko Alfaa mo Labe maandiniri
sincugol saare nden. Fewndo alsilamaaku Fuuta Jaloo, Labe laatino diiwal ɓurngal
mawnude ngal e diiwe ɗen jeenay. Hingal anndiranoo kadi pooɗotiral ɗuuɗungal e
almaamiiɓe ɓen. Ko ɗum addunoo Portooɓe ɓen yaltingol Labe e laamu Fuuta ngun
waɗta ɗum laamateeri feere. Alfaa Yaayaa ko laamɗo Labe ɓurɗo lollude on ka
timmoode teemedannde 19ɓere. Saare nden laatino kadi nokkuure ganndal e jannde
diina lislaamu e wallifaaku. Hannde Labe ko saare njulayaagal hittunde teeŋtii e
baŋŋe mbattiigu wondude e Senegal e Gammbi. Faggudu Labe ndun ko hasii kon ko
njulayaagal, e demal, e ngaynaaku e golleeji nyeenyuɓe wano gude leppi. Labe no
jogii kadi jaaɓi-haaɗtirde (iniwersite).



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jojjan%C9%97e_ne%C9%97%C9%97o_maa_hakkeeji_ne%C9%97%C9%97o

Jojjanɗe neɗɗo (no wi’ee kadi hakkeeji maa foddeeji neɗɗo) ko alhaali yowitiiɗo
e "jojjanɗe yummaaje e ndimaaku ngu kala Banii-Aadama hanndi e mum". E ko woowi
kon, ko ɗee ɗoo geɗe ndimaaku limtetee nde haala jojjanɗe neɗɗo umminaa:
jojjanɗe e baŋŋe ɓii-leydiyaagal (siwil) kanyum e dawro (polotigi), e piide
misal jojjannde nguurndam e ndimaaku, heɓtaare anndingol miijo mum, fotondiral
yeeso sariya. Hino jeyaa e mum kadi jojjanɗe yowitiiɗe e renndo e pinal, ɗum no
huɓindii jojjanɗe tawnugol hoore mum e alhaali pinal, jojjannde nyamri,
jojjannde golle, jojjannde jannde e needi.

Ko Bayyinaango Winndereyankeewo wonande Jojjanɗe Neɗɗo (Déclaration Universelle
des Droits de l’Homme) tonngunoo alhaali jojjanɗe neɗɗo e bayyinaango mum
maandiniingo. Kuulal aranal bayyinaango ngon ko ɗum fewjunoo: "Denndaangal
Banii-Aaadama’en jibinaama ko ɓe jeyɓe hoore maɓɓe ko ɓe fotooɓe e ndimaaku e
jojjanɗe. Hiɓe yeɗaa hakkille e yila, hiɓe haani huuwondirde e nder
neene-gootoyaagal."



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gine-Biso

Gine-Bisaawo (pt. Guiné-Bissau, maa Gine Bisaawo, ko aldaa e pocal ngal) ko
leydi e Afirik Hirnaangeeri, keernundi e Gine (Konaakiri) ka funnaange e Senegal
ka nano. Senngo hiirnaangewo ngon no feewti e Baharu Atalantik maa Oseyan
Atilanti.

Mbertudi leydi ndin ko 36.120 km2, jamaa hoɗuɗo e mayri no hewtaynoo fewndo
hitaande 2014 yimɓe 1.693.398. Laamorde nden ko Bisaawo, 395.954 (2010). Leydi
ndin hino jogii suriije (duuɗe) wi'eteeɗe Bijaago. Ka taariika ka laamu Ngaabu,
jeyannongu e laamateeri Malle (Empire du Mali) ɓuri lollude. Portokeesuuɓe ɓen
adino jogaade daande maayo leydi ndin ɓe huutori ɗum e golleeji maɓɓe ngeeygu
jiyaaɓe ɓaleeɓe. Ko non ɓe naatiri seeɗa seeɗa e leydi ndin fow haa ɓe watti ndi
e ley karhankaaku maɓɓe. Hitaande 1956 fedde wi'eteende PAIGC (Fedde wonannde
hettaare Gine Bisaawo e Kaapo Werde) fuɗɗii cippiro ngon. Nyannde 24 sutaambar
ɓe noddi jeytal hoore leydi ndin. Hooreejo-leydi arano on laati Luis Cabral. E
nder hitaande 1980, caggal sokolaaji heewɗi e baŋŋe ngaluuji leydi, miniteeriiɓe
folli Cabral laamii. Ko João Bernardo Vieira laatinoo hooreejo maɓɓe haa kanko
kadi miniteeriijo go'o wi'eteeɗo Kummba Yala jaɓti laamu ngun e juuɗe makko.
Vieira dogi yahri Portokeesi. Fitina e jiiɓu-jaaɓu naati e leydi ndin. Kummba
Yala kadi follaa, rebeljo inneteeɗo Mane naati e murtaldu. Kono gila woote
sakkitiiɗe ɗen hitaande 2005 (ko João Bernardo Vieira ganyinoo ɗe) Gine Bisaawo
heɓtii deeƴere seeɗa.



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buubakar_Biro

Buubakar Biro maa Bookar Biro ko almaamiijo sakkitoro on Fuuta Jaloo. Ko o
geɗaljo Almaami Umaru e Neene Jaarii'u. O etino bonnitugol maa ɗuytugol
jeyal-hoore ngal diiwe Fuuta ɗen joginoo ngal e tiiɗingol laamu Timmbo ngun. O
darniri non laamu njaggu ngu woowanooka Fuuta. Ko ɗun waɗi Bookar Biro haɓidi e
ko ɓurnoo kon e hooreeɓe Fuuta ɓen fewndo ngun jamaanu wano Alfaa Yaayaa lamɗo
Labe on. Ɗun hawri kadi e fuɗɗagol Porto naatugol e leydi ndin, sabu on tuma
hari leyɗe takkiiɗe Fuuta ɗen fow yanii e laamu kolonaaku. Ɓayti Bookar Biro
hawrii e Faransiiɓe ɓen ka hare Pooredaaka (hannde ɗun ko e perefektiir Maamun
woni) nuuwambur 1896, hooreeɓe Fuuta ɓen fow salii wallude mo. Tawi kadi
Portooɓe ɓen no ɓuri aalaaji hare kelɗuɗi. Ko ɗon Bookar Biro foolaa waraa
kanyun e wonndiɓɓe mun. Ko ɗon hettaare Fuuta nden timmi, Fuuta wattaa e nder
koloni wi'eteeɗo Rivières du Sud, wontoyɗo ɓaawi ɗon seeɗa Guinée Francaise.
Almamaaku Bookar Biro ngun hawriduno e murtal Hubbuuɓe ngal, do'unoongal
yirbinde laamu Fuuta ngun.



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfa_Yaya

Alfaa Yaayaa Jallo ko lamɗo diiwal Labe wonnoo, fewndo dawla alsilamaaku Fuuta
Jaloo. Diiwal Labe ngal laatino fayda feccere Fuuta Jaloo, hakkee ko ngal
yaajunoo, tentii ɓaawo dahugol leyɗeele janane wano leydi Seɓɓe (Manndinkooɓe)
Ngaabu.

O jibinaa e hitaande 1850, geɗal Kumanco ɓiɗɗo debbo lamɗo Ngaabu on Janke
Waali. O etii sortugol diiwal makko ngal e laamu Timmbo ngun. O tawano e
janfiiɓe Almaami Bookar Biro ɓen. Nde o tawnoo Faransiiɓe ɓen eɓɓii dahugol
Fuuta yewa laamu Almaamiiɓe ɓen, o ndaari no o gollidira e maɓɓe fii no o
danndira laamu makko ngun. Ko nden faljere mawnde heɓunoo ardiiɓe Fuuta ɓen
heewɓe e ngun jamaanu: ɓe anndaa feere bonnde Faransiiɓe ɓen ko "diviser pour
régner" (waddindira laamoo), e maanaa ko addugol lurral hakkunde ɓiɓɓe leydi fii
no joɗɗinira njaggu mun e hoore maɓɓe. Nde Faransiiɓe ɓen foolunoo Bookar Biro
ka hare Pooredaaka e hitaande 1896 ɓe immanii follirgol lamɓe diiwe wallunooɓe
ɓe gooto gooto kanyun e seekugol leyɗe maɓɓe watta pattaloy pattaloy. E hitaande
1905 ɓe janfii Alfaa Yaayaa ɓe egginiri mo Dahome. Ɓaawo ɗun ɓe artiri mo Fuuta
kono o fuɗɗii eɓɓindaade fii dartagol laamu Porto ngun. Portooɓe ɓen huli darja
makko huli wota o murtin leydi ndin. Ɓe nanngiti mo ɓe egginiri mo ngol ɗoo
laawol Moritani. Ko ɗon o faatii e hitaande 1912. 1969 laamu PDG (Seeku Tuuree)
artiri furee makko on kanko e Almaami Saamori Gine. Hiɓe belnaa berɗe Kamerun ka
laamorde Konaakiri. Yimre ngenndiyankoore (Hymne National) Gine nden ko e gimol
"Deemankan" tuugii: ko jeliiɓe Manndinkooɓe yimannoo Alfaa Yaayaa ngol gimol.
Hannde hannde Gine no semmbini fii Alfaa Yaayaa ƴettiri mo wa ŋanaajo leydi ndin
mawɗo kono taariika makko on hollitii wonnde himo tawaa e bonnunooɓe dawla mo
Karamoko Alfaa sincunoo on sabu ko lurre e janfaaji hakkunde yeesooɓe Fuuta ɓen
to qarnu 19aɓo lo'ini tugale on dawla udditani kolonaaku laawol.



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia%3aAccueil

Dear community. I am writing to you to promote a special wiki called Betawiki.
This wiki facilitates the localisation (l10n) of the MediaWiki interface. You
may have changed many messages here to use your language in the interface, but
if you would log in to for example the English language Wiktionary, you would
not be able to use the interface as well translated as here. Infact, of the 1792
messages in the core of MediaWiki, 0 messages have been translated. Betawiki
also supports the translation of messages of about 80 extensions, with almost
1675 messages.

If you wish to contribute to better support of your language in MediaWiki, as
well as for many MediaWiki extensions, please visit Betawiki, create an account
and request translator priviledges. You can see the current status of
localisation of your language on meta and do not forget to get in touch with
others that may already be working on your language on Betawiki.

If you have any further questions, please let me know on my talk page on
Betawiki. We will try and assist you as much as possible, for example by
importing all messages from a local wiki for you to start with, if you so
desire.

You can also find us on the Freenode IRC network in the channel #mediawiki-i18n
where we would be happy to help you get started.

Thank you very much for your attention and I do hope to see some of you on
Betawiki soon! Cheers! Siebrand@Betawiki 25 septembre 2007 à 08:32 (UTC)

Hello! I ask for permission to run my interwiki bot Byrialbot here at the Fula
Wikipedia, and to get a bot flag for it.

It will begin to do test edits in a few days. Thank you! Byrial 10:51, 30 June
2007 (UTC)

Please give a bot bit to SieBot, so it will not flood your RC as it adds
interwiki links using pywikipedia's interwiki.py. SieBot is active on 180
Wikipedias. See the user page of the bot for more details, or check a complete
overview of its activities here. Cheers! Siebrand (talk) 23:23, 17 August 2007
(UTC)

Hello! I ask for permission to run my interwiki bot PipepBot here, and to get a
bot flag for it.

Hello, at Meta there is the project of a Manual to help new and small
Wikipedias, and a set of Wikipedia pages and help pages every Wikipedia should
have. You gained experience in these questions when building up your language
edition, and I would like you to have a look and comment. Kind regards --Ziko 9
août 2008 à 13:25 (UTC)

Hoi, the most often used MediaWiki messages (less than 25% of all MediaWiki
messages) are the most visible messages. They help our readers and editors the
most. We are aiming to get these messages localised for as many languages as
possible by the end of the year. Please help us and yourself and localise these
messages. Thanks, GerardM 17 novembre 2008 à 13:05 (UTC)

Dear all, this is to request a bot flag for Synthebot. Its technical information
is summarized below.

Further technical information is available on its main page. Thank you in
advance. Regards, --Julian 10 décembre 2008 à 18:10 (UTC)

Hello. To facilitate steward granting of bot access, I suggest implementing the
standard bot policy on this wiki. In particular, this policy allows stewards to
automatically flag known interlanguage linking bots (if this page says that is
acceptable), which form the vast majority of such requests. The policy also
enables global bots on this wiki (if this page says that is acceptable), which
are trusted bots that will be given bot access on every wiki that allows global
bots.

This policy makes bot access requesting much easier for local users, operators,
and stewards. To implement it we only need to create a redirect to this page
from Project:Bot policy, and add a line at the top noting that it is used here.
Please read the text at m:Bot policy before commenting. If you object, please
say so; I hope to implement in one week if there is no objection, since it is
particularly written to streamline bot requests on wikis with little or no
community interested in bot access requests. --Luckas Blade 22 février 2009 à
16:16 (UTC)

This bot will be making anywheres between 4 and 12 edits per minute. If you
require any test edits or if you grant or deny the flag, please contact me on my
talk page over on Simple English Wikipedia: simple:User talk:Razorflame.
Darkicebot has the global bot flag. Darkicebot 3 mars 2009 à 01:23 (UTC)

The LocalisationUpdate extension is now enabled for all Wikimedia projects. From
now on new localisations that become available in SVN will become available to
your project within 24 hours. Your localisations get into SVN from
translatewiki.net typically within a day and at worst in two days. This is a
huge improvement from the old practice where the localisations became available
with new software. This could take weeks, even months.

Local messages have an impact on the performance of our system. It is best when
messages are as much as possible part of the system messages. In order to remove
unnecessary duplication, all the messages that have a local localisation and are
exactly the same as the system message will be removed. What we ask you to do is
to compare and proof read the messages in translatewiki.net and the local
messages. You can then either remove local messages when the translatewiki.net
message is to be preferred or, you can update the message at translatewiki.net.

The best way to answer the first question is to visit the translatewiki.net.
Change the language to your language, select the “vector” skin and add the
advanced tool bar in in the preferences and check out the new functionality. And
make some changes in your user page. When there is a need to improve on the
localisation, please make the necessary changess . It should update your
localisation straight away. We would like you to report each issue individually
at http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Usability_issues.

We would like you to report each issue individually at
http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Language issues. The issues you raise will all be
assessed. It is important to keep each issue separate, because this will make it
easier to understand the issues and find solutions.

PS This text has been approved by Naoko, Brion and Siebrand. Thanks, GerardM 28
septembre 2009 à 21:07 (UTC)

Hello! I am a Polish wikipedian and I would like to ask you for your help -
writing a new article about former Polish President who won the Nobel Peace
Prize in 1983 – Lech Wałęsa. I have looked for his biography in your Wikipedia
but without success. Polish Wikipedians will be grateful for your help. Thank
you so much in advance! PS you can find the English version of the article here.
Best wishes from Poland, Patrol110 3 octobre 2009 à 21:03 (UTC)

The call for applications for Wikimania Scholarships to attend Wikimania 2010 in
Gdansk, Poland (July 9-11) is now open. The Wikimedia Foundation offers
Scholarships to pay for selected individuals' round trip travel, accommodations,
and registration at the conference. To apply, visit the Wikimania 2010
scholarships information page, click the secure link available there, and fill
out the form to apply. For additional information, please visit the Scholarships
information and FAQ pages:

The project is proposed for closure due to inactivity and low content. Hugo.arg
2 juin 2010 à 15:26 (UTC)

Hello Wikipedians, I am Theo and I am working for the Wikimedia Foundation
during the 2010 Fundraiser. My job is to be the liaison between your community
and the Foundation. This year's fundraiser is intended to be a collaborative and
global effort; we recognize that banner messages which may perform well in the
United States don't necessarily translate well, or appeal to international
audiences.

I'm contacting you as I am currently looking for translators who are willing to
contribute to this project by helping translate and localize messages into
different languages and suggesting messages that would appeal to your readers on
the Fundraising Meta Page. We've started the setup on meta for both banner
submission, statistical analysis, and grouping volunteers together. Use the talk
pages on meta, talk to your local communities, talk to others, talk to us, and
add your feedback to the proposed messages as well! I look forward to working
with you during this year's fundraiser. If someone could translate this message
I would really appreciate it so that everyone is able to understand our goals
and contribute to this year's campaign. Theo (WMF) 20 octobre 2010 à 19:50 (UTC)

Further details and educational materials will be available shortly. The
referendum is scheduled for 12-27 August, 2011, and will be conducted on servers
hosted by a neutral third party. Referendum details, officials, voting
requirements, and supporting materials will be posted at Meta:Image filter
referendum shortly.

Sorry for delivering you a message in English. Please help translate the pages
on the referendum on Meta and join the translators mailing list.

For the coordinating committee, Philippe (WMF) Cbrown1023 Risker Mardetanha
PeterSymonds Robert Harris

The Wikimedia Foundation has brought together a new team of developers who are
dedicated to language support. This team is to support all the languages and
consequently it is not realistic to expect that the team members can provide
proper support for your language. It is for this reason that we are looking for
volunteers who will make up a language support team.

As much of the activity will be concentrated on translatewiki.net, it will be a
plus when team members know how to localise at translatewiki.net. Thanks,
Gmeijssen 22 octobre 2011 à 14:01 (UTC)

I humbly request bot status on this wiki in order to maintain Interwiki. Thank
you --Hedwig in Washington 23 octobre 2011 à 12:26 (UTC)

I apologize that you are receiving this message in English. Please help
translate it.

The Wikimedia Foundation is discussing changes to its Terms of Use. The
discussion can be found at Talk:Terms of use. Everyone is invited to join in.
Because the new version of Terms of use is not in final form, we are not able to
present official translations of it. Volunteers are welcome to translate it, as
German volunteers have done at m:Terms of use/de, but we ask that you note at
the top that the translation is unofficial and may become outdated as the
English version is changed. The translation request can be found at
m:Translation requests/WMF/Terms of Use 2 -- Maggie Dennis, Community Liaison 27
octobre 2011 à 00:44 (UTC)

I apologize that you are receiving this message in English. Please help
translate it.

The Wikimedia Foundation is seeking Community Fellows and project ideas for the
Community Fellowship Program. A Fellowship is a temporary position at the
Wikimedia Foundation in order to work on a specific project or set of projects.
Submissions for 2012 are encouraged to focus on the theme of improving editor
retention and increasing participation in Wikimedia projects. If interested,
please submit a project idea or apply to be a fellow by January 15, 2012. Please
visit https://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Wikimedia_Fellowships for more
information.

--Siko Bouterse, Head of Community Fellowships, Wikimedia Foundation 21 décembre
2011 à 12:58 (UTC)

Wikimedia Foundation is getting ready to push out 1.19 to all the WMF-hosted
wikis. As we finish wrapping up our code review, you can test the new version
right now on beta.wmflabs.org. For more information, please read the release
notes or the start of the final announcement.

Report any problems on the labs beta wiki and we'll work to address them before
they software is released to the production wikis.

Note that this cluster does have SUL but it is not integrated with SUL in
production, so you'll need to create another account. You should avoid using the
same password as you use here. — Global message delivery 15 janvier 2012 à 00:08
(UTC)

(Apologies if this message isn't in your language.) The Wikimedia Foundation is
planning to upgrade MediaWiki (the software powering this wiki) to its latest
version this month. You can help to test it before it is enabled, to avoid
disruption and breakage. More information is available in the full announcement.
Thank you for your understanding.

Guillaume Paumier, via the Global message delivery system (wrong page? You can
fix it.). 12 février 2012 à 14:59 (UTC)

(Apologies if this message isn't in your language. Please consider translating
it, as well as the full version of this announcement on Meta)

The Wikimedia Foundation is planning to do limited testing of IPv6 on June 2-3.
If there are not too many problems, we may fully enable IPv6 on World IPv6 day
(June 6), and keep it enabled.

Read the full version of this announcement on how to test the behavior of IPv6
with various tools and how to leave bug reports, and to find a fuller analysis
of the implications of the IPv6 migration.

--Erik Möller, VP of Engineering and Product Development, Wikimedia Foundation 2
juin 2012 à 00:56 (UTC)

Wikimedia Commons is happy to announce that the 2011 Picture of the Year
competition is now open. We are interested in your opinion as to which images
qualify to be the Picture of the Year 2011. Any user registered at Commons or a
Wikimedia wiki SUL-related to Commons with more than 75 edits before 1 April
2012 (UTC) is welcome to vote and, of course everyone is welcome to view!

About 600 of the best of Wikimedia Common's photos, animations, movies and
graphics were chosen –by the international Wikimedia Commons community– out of
12 million files during 2011 and are now called Featured Pictures.

From professional animal and plant shots to breathtaking panoramas and skylines,
restorations of historically relevant images, images portraying the world's best
architecture, maps, emblems, diagrams created with the most modern technology,
and impressive human portraits, Commons Features Pictures of all flavors.

See you on Commons! --Picture of the Year 2011 Committee 5 juin 2012 à 18:15
(UTC)

(Apologies if this message isn't in your language. Please consider translating
it)

As many of you are aware, the Wikimedia Board of Trustees recently initiated
important changes in the way that money is being distributed within the
Wikimedia movement. As part of this, a new community-led "Funds Dissemination
Committee" (FDC) is currently being set up. Already in 2012-13, its
recommendations will guide the decisions about the distribution of over 10
million US dollars among the Foundation, chapters and other eligible entities.

Now, seven capable, knowledgeable and trustworthy community members are sought
to volunteer on the initial Funds Dissemination Committee. It is expected to
take up its work in September. In addition, a community member is sought to be
the Ombudsperson for the FDC process. If you are interested in joining the
committee, read the call for volunteers. Nominations are planned to close on
August 15.

--Anasuya Sengupta, Director of Global Learning and Grantmaking, Wikimedia
Foundation 19 juillet 2012 à 20:03 (UTC)

You might also be interested in the idea to create a central Wikipedia Library
where approved editors would have access to all participating resource donors.
Add your feedback to the Community Fellowship proposal. Apologies for the
English message (translate here). Go sign up :) --Ocaasi (talk) 16 août 2012 à
02:14 (UTC)

I apologize for addressing you in English. I would be grateful if you could
translate this message into your language.

The Wikimedia Foundation is conducting a request for comment on a proposed
program that could provide legal assistance to users in specific support roles
who are named in a legal complaint as a defendant because of those roles. We
wanted to be sure that your community was aware of this discussion and would
have a chance to participate in that discussion.

If this page is not the best place to publicize this request for comment, please
help spread the word to those who may be interested in participating. (If you'd
like to help translating the "request for comment", program policy or other
pages into your language and don't know how the translation system works, please
come by my user talk page at m:User talk:Mdennis (WMF). I'll be happy to assist
or to connect you with a volunteer who can assist.)

As some of you might already have heard Wikimedia Deutschland is working on a
new Wikimedia project. It is called m:Wikidata. The goal of Wikidata is to
become a central data repository for the Wikipedias, its sister projects and the
world. In the future it will hold data like the number of inhabitants of a
country, the date of birth of a famous person or the length of a river. These
can then be used in all Wikimedia projects and outside of them.

It'd be great if you could join us, test the demo version, provide feedback and
take part in the development of Wikidata. You can find all the relevant
information including an FAQ and sign-up links for our on-wiki newsletter on the
Wikidata page on Meta.

For further discussions please use this talk page (if you are uncomfortable
writing in English you can also write in your native language there) or point me
to the place where your discussion is happening so I can answer there.

The only pre-requisite is for the volunteer to actually live in the country and
to have access to at least one donation method that we offer for that country
(mainly credit/debit card, but also real-time banking like IDEAL, E-wallets,
etc...) so we can do a live test and see if the donation goes through. All
volunteers will be reimbursed of the donations that eventually succeed (and they
will be low amounts, like 1-2 dollars)

(Apologies if this message isn't in your language.) Next week, the Wikimedia
Foundation will transition its main technical operations to a new data center in
Ashburn, Virginia, USA. This is intended to improve the technical performance
and reliability of all Wikimedia sites, including this wiki. There will be some
times when the site will be in read-only mode, and there may be full outages;
the current target windows for the migration are January 22nd, 23rd and 24th,
2013, from 17:00 to 01:00 UTC (see other timezones on timeanddate.com). More
information is available in the full announcement.

If you would like to stay informed of future technical upgrades, consider
becoming a Tech ambassador and joining the ambassadors mailing list. You will be
able to help your fellow Wikimedians have a voice in technical discussions and
be notified of important decisions.

Guillaume Paumier, via the Global message delivery system (wrong page? You can
fix it.). 19 Siilo 2013 à 15:14 (UTC)

Wikidata has been in development for a few months now. It is now time for the
roll-out of the first part of it on your Wikipedia. Phase 1 is the support for
the management of language links. It is already being used on the Hungarian,
Hebrew, Italian and English Wikipedias. The next step is to enable the extension
on all other Wikipedias. We have currently planned this for March 6.

Editors on en:wp have created a great page with all the necessary information
for editors and there is also an FAQ for this deployment. Please ask questions
you might have on the FAQ’s discussion page.

To stay up-to-date on everything happening around Wikidata please subscribe to
the newsletter that is delivered weekly to subscribed user’s talk pages. You can
see previous editions here.

Sorry for writing in English. I hope someone can translate this locally. If you
understand German better than English you can have a look at the announcement on
de:Wikipedia:Kurier.

As I annonced 2 weeks ago, Wikidata phase 1 (language links) has been deployed
here today. Language links in the sidebar are coming from Wikidata in addition
to the ones in the wiki text. To edit them, scroll to the bottom of the language
links, and click edit. You no longer need to maintain these links by hand in the
wiki text of the article.

Where can I find more information and ask questions? Editors on en:wp have
created a great page with all the necessary information for editors and there is
also an FAQ for this deployment. It'd be great if you could bring this to this
wiki if that has not already happened. Please ask questions you might have on
the FAQ’s discussion page.

I want to be kept up to date about Wikidata To stay up-to-date on everything
happening around Wikidata please subscribe to the newsletter that is delivered
weekly to subscribed user’s talk pages.

(Please consider translating this message for the benefit of your fellow
Wikimedians)

Greetings. As you might have seen on the Wikimedia tech blog or the tech
ambassadors list, a new functionality called "Lua" is being enabled on all
Wikimedia sites today. Lua is a scripting language that enables you to write
faster and more powerful MediaWiki templates.

If you have questions about how to convert existing templates to Lua (or how to
create new ones), we'll be holding two support sessions on IRC next week: one on
Wednesday (for Oceania, Asia & America) and one on Friday (for Europe, Africa &
America); see m:IRC office hours for the details. If you can't make it, you can
also get help at mw:Talk:Lua scripting.

If you'd like to learn about this kind of events earlier in advance, consider
becoming a Tech ambassador by subscribing to the mailing list. You will also be
able to help your fellow Wikimedians have a voice in technical discussions and
be notified of important decisions.

Guillaume Paumier, via the Global message delivery system. 13 MBooy 2013 à 19:25
(UTC) (wrong page? You can fix it.)

Sorry for writing in English. I hope someone can translate this. If you
understand German better than English you can have a look at the announcement on
de:Wikipedia:Kurier.

A while ago the first phase of Wikidata was enabled on this Wikipedia. This
means you are getting the language links in each article from Wikidata. It is
soon time to enable the second phase of Wikidata (infoboxes) here. We have
already done this on the [first 11 Wikipedias] (it, he, hu, ru, tr, uk, uz, hr,
bs, sr, sh) and things are looking good. The next step is English Wikipedia.
This is planned for April 8. If everything works out fine we will deploy on all
remaining Wikipedias on April 10. I will update this part of the FAQ if there
are any issues forcing us to change this date. I will also sent another note to
this village pump once the deployment is finished.

What will happen once we have phase 2 enabled here? Once it is enabled in a few
days you will be able to make use of the structured data that is available on
Wikidata in your articles/infoboxes. It includes things like the symbol for a
chemical element, the ISBN for a book or the top level domain of a country.
(None of this will happen automatically. Someone will have to change the article
or infobox template for this to happen!)

We are working on expanding the parser function so you can for example use
{{#property:chief executive officer}} instead of {{#property:p169}}. The
complete plan for this is here.

Where can I find more information and ask questions? We have collected the main
questions in an FAQ for this deployment. Please ask questions you might have on
the FAQ’s discussion page.

I want to be kept up to date about Wikidata To stay up-to-date on everything
happening around Wikidata please subscribe to the newsletter that is delivered
weekly to subscribed user’s talk pages.

Read this message in English / Lleer esti mensaxe n'asturianu / বাংলায় এই
বার্তাটি পড়ুন / Llegiu aquest missatge en català / Læs denne besked på dansk /
Lies diese Nachricht auf Deutsch / Leś cal mesag' chè in Emiliàn / Leer este
mensaje en español / Lue tämä viesti suomeksi / Lire ce message en français /
Ler esta mensaxe en galego / हिन्दी / Pročitajte ovu poruku na hrvatskom / Baca
pesan ini dalam Bahasa Indonesia / Leggi questo messaggio in italiano / ಈ
ಸಂದೇಶವನ್ನು ಕನ್ನಡದಲ್ಲಿ ಓದಿ / Aqra dan il-messaġġ bil-Malti / norsk (bokmål) /
Lees dit bericht in het Nederlands / Przeczytaj tę wiadomość po polsku / Citiți
acest mesaj în română / Прочитать это сообщение на русском / Farriintaan ku aqri
Af-Soomaali / Pročitaj ovu poruku na srpskom (Прочитај ову поруку на српском) /
อ่านข้อความนี้ในภาษาไทย / Прочитати це повідомлення українською мовою / Đọc
thông báo bằng tiếng Việt / 使用中文阅读本信息。

Un nouvel appel à commentaires a été lancé sur Meta relatif à la destitution des
administrateurs inactifs. Généralement, cette proposition des stewards
n'affectera pas les projets qui ont déjà des procédures de destitution des
administrateurs.

Nous compilons aussi une liste des projets ayant déjà de telles procédures de
destitution sur la page de discussion de l'appel à commentaires. N'hésitez pas à
y ajouter votre projet si celui-ci contient une règle sur l'inactivité des
administrateurs.

Merci, Billinghurst (thanks to all the translators!) 24 Seeɗto 2013 à 04:37
(UTC)

Sorry for writing in English. I hope someone can translate this. If you
understand German better than English you can have a look at the announcement on
de:Wikipedia:Kurier.

A while ago the first phase of Wikidata was enabled on this Wikipedia. This
means you are getting the language links in each article from Wikidata. We have
now enabled the second phase of Wikidata (infoboxes) here. We have already done
this on the [first 11 Wikipedias] (it, he, hu, ru, tr, uk, uz, hr, bs, sr, sh) a
month ago and two days ago on the English Wikipedia. Today all the remaining
Wikipedias followed.

What does having phase 2 enabled here mean? You are now able to make use of the
structured data that is available on Wikidata in your articles/infoboxes. It
includes things like the symbol for a chemical element, the ISBN for a book or
the top level domain of a country. (None of this will happen automatically.
Someone will have to change the article or infobox template for this to happen!)
The current state is just the beginning though. It will be extended based on
feedback we get from you now.

We are working on expanding the parser function so you can for example use
{{#property:headquarter location}} instead of {{#property:p159}}. The complete
plan for this is here.

Where can I test this? You can test it on test2 if you don't want to do it in an
article here.

Where can I find more information and ask questions? We have collected the main
questions in an FAQ for this deployment. Please ask questions you might have on
the FAQ’s discussion page.

I want to be kept up to date about Wikidata To stay up-to-date on everything
happening around Wikidata please subscribe to the newsletter that is delivered
weekly to subscribed user’s talk pages.

We are excited about taking yet another step towards allowing all Wikipedias
share structured data and collect and curate it together. --Lydia Pintscher 24
Seeɗto 2013 à 19:06 (UTC)

Hi, apologies for posting this in English, but I wanted to alert your community
to a discussion on Meta about potential changes to the Wikimedia Trademark
Policy. Please translate this statement if you can. We hope that you will all
participate in the discussion; we also welcome translations of the legal team’s
statement into as many languages as possible and encourage you to voice your
thoughts there. Please see the Trademark practices discussion (on Meta-Wiki) for
more information. Thank you! --Mdennis (WMF) (talk)

The Wikipedia Library gets Wikipedia editors free access to reliable sources
that are behind paywalls. I want to alert you to our latest donation.

My apologies for the incorrect link: You can sign up for Cochrane Collaboration
accounts at the COCHRANE sign-up page. Cheers, Ocaasi 16 Korse 2013 à 21:37
(UTC)

Hello, Sorry for English but It's very important for bot operators so I hope
someone translates this. Pywikipedia is migrating to Git so after July 26, SVN
checkouts won't be updated If you're using Pywikipedia you have to switch to
git, otherwise you will use out-dated framework and your bot might not work
properly. There is a manual for doing that and a blog post explaining about this
change in non-technical language. If you have question feel free to ask in
mw:Manual talk:Pywikipediabot/Gerrit, mailing list, or in the IRC channel. Best
Amir (via Global message delivery). 23 Morso 2013 à 13:10 (UTC)

The Wikimedia Foundation will soon turn on VisualEditor for all users, all the
time on your Wikipedia. Right now your Wikipedia does not have any local
documents on VisualEditor, and we hope that your community can change that. To
find out about how you can help with translations visit the TranslationCentral
for VisualEditor and read the easy instructions on bringing information to your
Wikipedia. The User Guide and the FAQ are very important to have in your
language.

We want to find out as much as we can from you about VisualEditor and how it
helps your Wikipedia, and having local pages is a great way to start. We also
encourage you to leave feedback on Mediawiki where the community can offer
ideas, opinions, and point out bugs that may still exist in the software that
need to be reported to Bugzilla. If you are able to speak for the concerns of
others in English on MediaWiki or locally I encourage you to help your community
to be represented in this process.

If you can help translate the user interface for VisualEditor to your language,
you can help with that as well. Translatewiki has open tasks for translating
VisualEditor. A direct link to translate the user interface is here. You can see
how we are doing with those translations here. You need an account on
Translatewiki to translate. This account is free and easy to create.

If we can help your community in any way with this process, please let me know
and I will do my best to assist your Wikipedia with this |exciting development.
You can contact me on my meta talk page or by email. You can also contact
Patrick Earley for help with translations and documents on Mediawiki. We look
forward to working with you to bring the VisualEditor experience to your
Wikipedia! Keegan (WMF) (talk) 30 Morso 2013 à 19:00 (UTC)

Greetings. Starting on August 21 (tomorrow), all users with an account will be
using HTTPS to access Wikimedia sites. HTTPS brings better security and improves
your privacy. More information is available at m:HTTPS.

If HTTPS causes problems for you, tell us on bugzilla, on IRC (in the
#wikimedia-operations channel) or on meta. If you can't use the other methods,
you can also send an e-mail to https@wikimedia.org.

Greg Grossmeier (via the Global message delivery system). 20 Juko 2013 à 19:02
(UTC) (wrong page? You can fix it.)

Notifications will inform users about new activity that affects them on this
wiki in a unified way: for example, this new tool will let you know when you
have new talk page messages, edit reverts, mentions or links -- and is designed
to augment (rather than replace) the watchlist. The Wikimedia Foundation's
editor engagement team developed this tool (code-named 'Echo') earlier this
year, to help users contribute more productively to MediaWiki projects.

We're now getting ready to bring Notifications to almost all other Wikimedia
sites, and are aiming for a 22 October deployment, as outlined in this release
plan. It is important that notifications is translated for all of the languages
we serve.

Please let us know if you have any questions, suggestions or comments about this
new tool. For more information, visit this project hub and this help page.
Keegan (WMF) (talk) 4 Yarkomaa 2013 à 18:30 (UTC)

Hello. A new policy regarding the removal of "advanced rights" (administrator,
bureaucrat, etc) was recently adopted by global community consensus (your
community received a notice about the discussion). According to this policy, the
stewards are reviewing administrators' activity on smaller wikis. To the best of
our knowledge, your wiki does not have a formal process for removing "advanced
rights" from inactive accounts. This means that the stewards will take care of
this according to the new admin activity review here.

However, if you as a community would like to create your own activity review
process superseding the global one, want to make another decision about these
inactive rights holders, or already have a policy that we missed, then please
notify the stewards on Meta-Wiki so that we know not to proceed with the rights
review on your wiki. Thanks, --MF-Warburg (discussion) 12 Yarkomaa 2013 à 16:47
(UTC)

I apologize for this message being only in English. Please translate it if
needed to help your community.

The Wikimedia Foundation's multimedia team seeks community guidance on a
proposal to support the MP4 video format. This digital video standard is used
widely around the world to record, edit and watch videos on mobile phones,
desktop computers and home video devices. It is also known as H.264/MPEG-4 or
AVC.

You are also welcome to join tomorrow's Office hours chat on IRC, this Thursday,
January 16, at 19:00 UTC, if you would like to discuss this project with our
team and other community members.

We look forward to a constructive discussion with you, so we can make a more
informed decision together on this important topic. Keegan (WMF) (talk) 16 Siilo
2014 à 06:47 (UTC)

The Catalan-speaking world... Want to find out more? From March 16 to April 15
we will organise the Catalan Culture Challenge, a Wikipedia editing contest in
which victory will go to those who start and improve the greatest number of
articles about 50 key figures of Catalan culture. You can take part by creating
or expanding articles on these people in your native language (or any other one
you speak). It would be lovely to have you on board. :-)

There is a current discussion on German Wikipedia on a decision of Asaf Bartov,
Head of WMF Grants and Global South Partnerships, Wikimedia Foundation, who
rejected a request for funding a proposal from wikipedians from eowiki one year
ago with the explanation the existence, cultivation, and growth of the Esperanto
Wikipedia does not advance our educational mission. No one needs free knowledge
in Esperanto. On meta there has also started a discussion about that decision.
--Holder (discussion) 5 Duujal 2014 à 09:58 (UTC)

Hello and sorry for writing in English. Can anyone help me translate a small
article (2 paragraphs) from English to your language and create the article in
your wiki? Please, fell free to answer in my talk page in your wiki anytime.
Thanks! Xaris333 (discussion) 12 Juko 2014 à 23:21 (UTC)

Greetings! The Individual Engagement Grants program is accepting proposals for
funding new experiments from September 1st to 30th. Your idea could improve
Wikimedia projects with a new tool or gadget, a better process to support
community-building on your wiki, research on an important issue, or something
else we haven't thought of yet. Whether you need $200 or $30,000 USD, Individual
Engagement Grants can cover your own project development time in addition to
hiring others to help you.

Wikimedia España invites you to join the Monuments of Spain Challenge. And
what’s that? It’s a contest. You have to edit, translate or expand articles
about the Spanish monuments and you will be granted points. So you’re not just
writing about wonderful buildings: you can get prizes!

The time of the contest will include all October and any information you may
need is right here.

Hello, Dear wikipedians. I invite you to edit and improve this article and to
add information about your and other country.--Kaiyr (discussion) 31 Yarkomaa
2014 à 11:36 (UTC)

(Sorry for the English - please translate this message!) MediaWiki message
delivery (discussion) 4 MBooy 2015 à 20:01 (UTC)

Hello, I made a proposal on Meta to change the rules for the steward
confirmations. Currently consensus to remove is required for a steward to lose
his status, however I think it's fairer to the community if every steward needed
the consensus to keep. As this is an issue that affects all WMF wikis, I'm
sending this notification to let people know & be able to participate. Best
regards, --MF-W 10 Seeɗto 2015 à 16:12 (UTC)

This is a message from the 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee.
Translations are available.

I am pleased to announce that nominations are now being accepted for the 2015
Wikimedia Foundation Elections. This year the Board and the FDC Staff are
looking for a diverse set of candidates from regions and projects that are
traditionally under-represented on the board and in the movement as well as
candidates with experience in technology, product or finance. To this end they
have published letters describing what they think is needed and, recognizing
that those who know the community the best are the community themselves, the
election committee is accepting nominations for community members you think
should run and will reach out to those nominated to provide them with
information about the job and the election process.

Board of Trustees The Board of Trustees is the decision-making body that is
ultimately responsible for the long term sustainability of the Foundation, so we
value wide input into its selection. There are three positions being filled.
More information about this role can be found at the board elections page.

Funds Dissemination Committee (FDC) The Funds Dissemination Committee (FDC)
makes recommendations about how to allocate Wikimedia movement funds to eligible
entities. There are five positions being filled. More information about this
role can be found at the FDC elections page.

Funds Dissemination Committee (FDC) Ombud The FDC Ombud receives complaints and
feedback about the FDC process, investigates complaints at the request of the
Board of Trustees, and summarizes the investigations and feedback for the Board
of Trustees on an annual basis. One position is being filled. More information
about this role can be found at the FDC Ombudsperson elections page.

The candidacy submission phase lasts from 00:00 UTC April 20 to 23:59 UTC May 5
for the Board and from 00:00 UTCApril 20 to 23:59 UTC April 30 for the FDC and
FDC Ombudsperson. This year, we are accepting both self-nominations and
nominations of others. More information on this election and the nomination
process can be found on the 2015 Wikimedia elections page on Meta-Wiki.

On behalf of the Elections Committee, -Gregory Varnum (User:Varnent)
Coordinator, 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee

Posted by the MediaWiki message delivery on behalf of the 2015 Wikimedia
Foundation Elections Committee, 05:03, 21 April 2015 (UTC) • Translate • Get
help

This is a message from the 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee.
Translations are available.

Voting has begun for eligible voters in the 2015 elections for the Funds
Dissemination Committee (FDC) and FDC Ombudsperson. Questions and discussion
with the candidates for the Funds Dissemination Committee (FDC) and FDC
Ombudsperson will continue during the voting. Nominations for the Board of
Trustees will be accepted until 23:59 UTC May 5.

The Funds Dissemination Committee (FDC) makes recommendations about how to
allocate Wikimedia movement funds to eligible entities. There are five positions
on the committee being filled.

The FDC Ombudsperson receives complaints and feedback about the FDC process,
investigates complaints at the request of the Board of Trustees, and summarizes
the investigations and feedback for the Board of Trustees on an annual basis.
One position is being filled.

The voting phase lasts from 00:00 UTC May 3 to 23:59 UTC May 10. Click here to
vote. Questions and discussion with the candidates will continue during that
time. Click here to ask the FDC candidates a question. Click here to ask the FDC
Ombudsperson candidates a question. More information on the candidates and the
elections can be found on the 2015 FDC election page, the 2015 FDC Ombudsperson
election page, and the 2015 Board election page on Meta-Wiki.

On behalf of the Elections Committee, -Gregory Varnum (User:Varnent) Volunteer
Coordinator, 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee

Posted by the MediaWiki message delivery 03:45, 4 May 2015 (UTC) • Translate •
Get help

This is a message from the 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee.
Translations are available.

Voting has begun for eligible voters in the 2015 elections for the Wikimedia
Foundation Board of Trustees. Questions and discussion with the candidates for
the Board will continue during the voting.

The Wikimedia Foundation Board of Trustees is the ultimate governing authority
of the Wikimedia Foundation, a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization registered in
the United States. The Wikimedia Foundation manages many diverse projects such
as Wikipedia and Commons.

The voting phase lasts from 00:00 UTC May 17 to 23:59 UTC May 31. Click here to
vote. More information on the candidates and the elections can be found on the
2015 Board election page on Meta-Wiki.

On behalf of the Elections Committee, -Gregory Varnum (User:Varnent) Volunteer
Coordinator, 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee

Posted by the MediaWiki message delivery 17:20, 17 May 2015 (UTC) • Translate •
Get help

My apologies for posting this message in English. Please help translate it if
you can.

The Wikimedia Foundation would like your feedback about how we can reimagine
Wikimedia Foundation grants, to better support people and ideas in your
Wikimedia project. Ways to participate:

(Opt-out Instructions) This message was sent by I JethroBT (WMF) through
MediaWiki message delivery. 18 Juko 2015 à 23:56 (UTC)

Please help translate the statements on Meta Wiki. You can read more on the
Wikimedia blog.

My apologies for posting this message in English. Please help translate it if
you can.

Greetings! The Individual Engagement Grants program is accepting proposals until
September 29th to fund new tools, community-building processes, and other
experimental ideas that enhance the work of Wikimedia volunteers. Whether you
need a small or large amount of funds (up to $30,000 USD), Individual Engagement
Grants can support you and your team’s project development time in addition to
project expenses such as materials, travel, and rental space.

I JethroBT (WMF), Community Resources, Wikimedia Foundation. 4 Siilto 2015 à
20:52 (UTC)

(Opt-out Instructions) This message was sent by I JethroBT (WMF) (talk) through
MediaWiki message delivery.

There is still one week left to submit Individual Engagement Grant (IEG)
proposals before the September 29th deadline. If you have ideas for new tools,
community-building processes, and other experimental projects that enhance the
work of Wikimedia volunteers, start your proposal today! Please encourage others
who have great ideas to apply as well. Support is available if you want help
turning your idea into a grant request.

Last month, we asked for community feedback on a proposal to change the
structure of WMF grant programs. Thanks to the 200+ people who participated! A
report on what we learned and changed based on this consultation is now
available.

Come read about the findings and next steps as WMF’s Community Resources team
begins to implement changes based on your feedback. Your questions and comments
are welcome on the outcomes discussion page.

The Community Advocacy team the Wikimedia Foundation has opened a consultation
on the topic of harassment on Meta. The consultation period is intended to run
for one month from today, November 16, and end on December 17. Please share your
thoughts there on harassment-related issues facing our communities and potential
solutions. (Note: this consultation is not intended to evaluate specific cases
of harassment, but rather to discuss the problem of harassment itself.)

This is a message regarding the proposed 2015 Free Bassel banner. Translations
are available.

This is to inform all Wikimedia contributors that a straw poll seeking your
involvement has just been started on Meta-Wiki.

As some of your might be aware, a small group of Wikimedia volunteers have
proposed a banner campaign informing Wikipedia readers about the urgent
situation of our fellow Wikipedian, open source software developer and Creative
Commons activist, Bassel Khartabil. An exemplary banner and an explanatory page
have now been prepared, and translated into about half a dozen languages by
volunteer translators.

We are seeking your involvement to decide if the global Wikimedia community
approves starting a banner campaign asking Wikipedia readers to call on the
Syrian government to release Bassel from prison. We understand that a campaign
like this would be unprecedented in Wikipedia's history, which is why we're
seeking the widest possible consensus among the community.

Given Bassel's urgent situation and the resulting tight schedule, we ask
everyone to get involved with the poll and the discussion to the widest possible
extent, and to promote it among your communities as soon as possible.

(Apologies for writing in English; please kindly translate this message into
your own language.)

Posted by the MediaWiki message delivery 21:47, 25 November 2015 (UTC) •
Translate • Get help

Patrick Earley (WMF) via MediaWiki message delivery (discussion) 5 Siilo 2016 à
01:49 (UTC)

Your input is welcome (and greatly desired) at the Meta discussion, 2016
Strategy/Community consultation.

Apologies for English, where this is posted on a non-English project. We thought
it was more important to get the consultation translated as much as possible,
and good headway has been made there in some languages. There is still much to
do, however! We created m:2016 Strategy/Translations to try to help coordinate
what needs translation and what progress is being made. :)

I hope you'll join us! Maggie Dennis via MediaWiki message delivery (discussion)
18 Siilo 2016 à 19:06 (UTC)

Fulani is missing from this page:
https://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/There_is_also_a_Wikipedia_in_your_language More
than 100 languages are now listed. Thank you, Varlaam (discussion) 27 Siilo 2016
à 04:05 (UTC)

Greetings! The Individual Engagement Grants (IEG) program is accepting proposals
until April 12th to fund new tools, research, outreach efforts, and other
experiments that enhance the work of Wikimedia volunteers. Whether you need a
small or large amount of funds (up to $30,000 USD), IEGs can support you and
your team’s project development time in addition to project expenses such as
materials, travel, and rental space.

Hello, after six weeks of community discussion about Wikipedia to the Moon,
there are now 10 different proposals for content for the mission. Starting
today, you can vote for them on Meta-Wiki, and decide what we will work on: a
Wikipedia canon, different lists, the Moon in 300 languages, an astronomy
editathon, featured articles, articles about technology, endangered things, or
DNA-related topics. You can even vote against community involvement. Voting is
open until 24 June. Sorry that this message is again in English only, but we are
using village pumps to reach as many communities as possible, so that everyone
knows they can vote. Best, Moon team at Wikimedia Deutschland 10 Korse 2016 à
15:31 (UTC)

You may already have heard about Wikipedia to the Moon: A team of scientists
called the “PT Scientists” are going to send a space craft to the moon in 2017
and they want to take Wikipedia along with them. Because Wikipedia is so big, we
cannot send all of it to the moon. That is why the international
Wikipedia-community has voted to send all “Featured Articles and Featured Lists“
from all languages in Wikipedia.

“Featured Articles“ is a category in many language versions of Wikipedia that
collects the very best articles in that language. Your community does not
currently have a „Featured Articles“ category. Ideally, we want to take every
language on Wikipedia to the moon and we also want to take the best articles in
your language. That is why we would like you to tell us what the very best
articles in your language are.

Greetings! The Project Grants program is currently accepting proposals for
funding. There is just over a week left to submit before the October 11
deadline. If you have ideas for software, offline outreach, research, online
community organizing, or other projects that enhance the work of Wikimedia
volunteers, start your proposal today! Please encourage others who have great
ideas to apply as well. Support is available if you want help turning your idea
into a grant request.

Hello! I'm writing from the Wikimedia Foundation to invite you to give your
feedback on a proposed move from CC BY-SA 3.0 to a CC BY-SA 4.0 license across
all Wikimedia projects. The consultation will run from October 5 to November 8,
and we hope to receive a wide range of viewpoints and opinions. Please, if you
are interested, take part in the discussion on Meta-Wiki.

Apologies that this message is only in English. This message can be read and
translated in more languages here. Joe Sutherland (talk) 6 Yarkomaa 2016 à 01:34
(UTC)

I apologise that this message is in English.
⧼Centralnotice-shared-help-translate⧽

Select strong passwords – eight or more characters long, and containing letters,
numbers, and punctuation. Joe Sutherland (Yeewtere) / MediaWiki message delivery
(discussion) 13 Jolal 2016 à 23:59 (UTC)

Please accept my apologies - that first line should read "Help with
translations!". Joe Sutherland (WMF) (talk) / MediaWiki message delivery
(discussion) 14 Jolal 2016 à 00:11 (UTC)

James Forrester (Product Manager, Editing department, Wikimedia Foundation) --14
Bowte 2016 à 19:32 (UTC)



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fuuta_Jalon

Fuuta Jaloo (na Fuuta Jalon) ko leydi doŋi e pelle jeyaandi hannde e Ndenndaandi
Gine. Hindi tummbii hakkunde Gine.

Fuuta Jaloo (leydi Fulɓe e Jalunkeeɓe) no wertii e ko yahata 80.000 Km2. Ɗii ɗoo
nooneeji leydi no tawee e mayri: boowe, ndantaari, hansaŋere, doŋi, pelle,
dunkiiji. Ce’e (teelal: seere) e ayɗe no heewi kadi.

Lenyol ɓurngol ɗuuɗude ngol ko Fulɓe. Hiɓe wowla pular, caltuka fulfulde,
jeyduka e pulaarji Senegal e Gammbiya kono hika jogii mbaadiiji makka heertiiɗi.
Leƴƴi go’o kadi ko Jalunkeeɓe, Jaakankeeɓe, Maninkaaɓe, Konyaagiiɓe, Basariiɓe,
Bajarankeeɓe, ekn. Ko ɗemngal pular ɓuretee wowleede Fuuta Jaloo.

Fuuta Jaloo ko leydi hoɗaandi gila duuɓi guluuji guluuji. Hino sikkaa Fulɓe
aynooɓe fuɗɗino naatude ton gila jamaanu laamateeri Gana e Malle (hakkunde
teeminannde 9aɓere haa 15aɓere. Gooto e murtannooɓe laamateeri Malle ɓen laatino
Pullo no wi’ee Koli Teŋella. Hino sikkaa Koli Teŋella ardu e yimɓe mum haa ka
wi’etee ɗon hannde Telimile, ko ɗon o surraa (ɗum ko e teeminannde 15aɓere). Ka
attorum Fulɓe e lasliiɓe ɓen, ɗum ko Jalunkeeɓe, Soosooɓe e leƴƴi go’o wano
Kisiiɓe e Baagaaɓe, ɓe hoɗiduno e hoore jam, teeŋtii nde tawnoo ɓe fow maɓɓe ko
sanamuuji ɓe rewaynoo. Kono ittude e teeminannde 18aɓere alsilamaaku fuɗɗii
naatude e leydi ndin. Ko Fulɓe iwrunooɓe reedu Maasina wonunoo sabu mum. Nde ɓe
tawnoo ɓe fuɗɗike ɗuuɗude e doolnude, ɓe murtitani Jalunkeeɓe ɓen. Hareeji
jihaadi wulɗi huɓɓi e leydi ndin. Kono juulɓe ɓen heɓi poolgal. Ko ka konu
Talansan, laatinoongu e hitaande 1725 Fulɓe ɓen fooli fes ɓe sinci dawla
almamaaku e ley ardungal Alfaa Ibrahiima Sammbegu, ɓurɗo lollirde Karamoko
Alfaa. Diiwe 9 sincaa. Kannje woni: Timmbo (laamorde nden), Timmbi Tunni,
Keebaali, Koyin, Kollaaɗe, Ɓuriyaa, Foodee Hajji, Fugummbaa, Labe. Diiwal kala
no mari laamɗo mum. Ko Almaami on woni hooreejo Fuuta on fow, hella ka dawrugol
e hella ka diina.



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aamadu_Tumani_Tuure

Hooreejo leydi Maali on. O jibinaa ñannde 4 jolal (nuwambar) 1948 Mopti. Innde
makko no lolliri kadi ATT. Himo anndiraa laataade koninkeejo accitanɗo siwiljo
laamu ngun, ko heewaa nder Afirik. E hitaande 1991, caggal jamaa Maali on
murtanii Persidan Muusaa Tarawore, lamɗo mo ɓe wemmbinoo fota e juuɗe mum, larme
on felli wari yoga e yimɓe kono neeɓitaali Aamadu Tumaani Tuuree liɓi laamu
makko ngun nodditi Conférence Nationale, ko ɗum woni konferansi ngenndiijum.
Ɓaawo ɗon seeɗa, 1992, woote demokaraasiyankeeje waɗaa, Tumaani Tuuree jonniti
laamu ngun siwiljo, ɗum ko Alfaa Umar Konaare. Ɓaawo Konaare timminii happu mum
ɗiɗaɓu ngun 2002, Tumaani Tuuree arti e nder dawrugol (polotigi): o fooli
Sumayla Siisee ka woote. Gila ɗum himo laamii leydi Maali. O hollitii ko
neeɓaali wonde o goddanaa luttugol e laamu saanga happu makko feewndiingu ngun
lanni. Kono ɗum haɗaali koninkooɓe follude mo ñannde 22 maarasi 2012 sabu e ko
ɓe feliri mo kon, o tinnaaki e tiindaagol murtituɓe Burdameeɓe (Tuwaareg'en) ɓen
foltaniiɓe laamu ngun ka nano leydi. Hooreejo ɓen koninkooɓe no innee Aamadu
Sanogo. Ñannde 8 ibriilu, Tumaani Tuuree hollitii wonde o accitii laamu ngun o
wi'i hay gooto non doolaali mo e waɗirgol non ko kanko tigi e hoore makko
anniyii accitugol ngu. Tumaani Tuuree ko e leñol Soŋay jeyaa ka jibinannde kono
nde wonnoo ko hakkunde Fulɓe Maasina o neʼaa, ko o Hal-pular mo pulaaku mum
timmi tis.



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pullo

Pullo (keewal mum ko Fulɓe) ko lenyol aynooɓe (durooɓe) hoɗuɓe e diiwaanuuji
Sahel takko jeereende Sahara. Hiɓe tawee hannde e leyɗe 15 Afirik Hiirnaange,
yoga e majje ko Maali, Senegal, Gine haa leyɗe Afirik Hakkundeeri yeru Caad,
Ndenndaandi Santrafirik e Sudaan. Ko woni sabu ngool saakitagol ko eggudu ndu
aynooɓe ɓen ɗaɓɓiranta naʼi maɓɓe ɗin huɗo e njaram.

Hannde non Fulɓe ko ɓuri heewde koo accii nguurndam egga-hoɗa hino tabiti e
nokkuure wootere hino jokki golleeji wano demal, njulaagu to caʼe mawɗe Afirik
Hiirnaange. Hino woodi e maɓɓe kadi nanngooɓe liƴƴi teeŋtii Senegal-Moritani
(hiɓe wiʼee toon Suubalɓe) maa Gine kanyum e nyeenyuɓe. Hannde ɗuuɗal Fulɓe ko
juulɓe, ɗemngal maɓɓe no wiʼee pular maa pulaar maa fulfulde, hingal jeyaa e
ɗemɗe Hiirnaange-Atlantik.

Ɗunndi Fulɓe ndin anndaaka no selliri sabu leyɗe ɗen woowaa waɗude winndito
leƴƴi. Tuumo ngon hino hakkunde miliyonji 16 e miliyonji 25 haa 26.

Iwdi Fulɓe ndin haa hannde anndaaka no laaɓiri. Annduɓe ɓen hino yeddondira gila
teemedannde jeenayaɓere nden e fii on fiyaaku. Ko woni sabu mum non ko seedugol
Fulɓe ngol e leƴƴi hoɗdaaɗi ɗin to mbaadi. Ko honɗum Fulɓe ɓen tigi wiʼi e on
fiyaaku? E hino ɗoo ko bammbaaɗo (farba) Pullo mo Kamarun jantii: „Ko woni
asngol e leñol Fulɓe fuu ƴoororde muʼum Malle. Pullo kam fuu Malle ƴifti, Pullo
kam fuu woodaa e ƴiwi tonaa Malle. Innde Pullo kam fuu Malle nii ɗoofi. Mone fuu
jammaa (jonnaa yettoore) e laawol, kanjum ɗuuɗini inɗe leʼi (leƴƴi) Fulɓe, amma
koo non fuu, to lencitoraama nii, tawaa Pullo kam fuu Malle ƴoori.“ „Ukba woni
jibbinɗo Fulɓe, puɗɗuɗo leñol maɓɓe, kanko aawi ngol. Kanko boo ɗum Aaraabo,
fuuna o ƴiwi o yehi o jooɗoyi Fuuta Tooro. Ɗon o teʼi (resi) Bajju Maŋgo – woɓɓe
Bajju Maŋga mbiʼiirata mo – mo leñol Sarakulleʼen… O dañi ɓiɓɓe nayo: rewɓe tato
e gorko gooto. Kamɓe ngoni: Deeto, Wayyu, Naasu e Uuruba biʼeteeɗo Aaraabo. Nder
nayo ɓeʼe ko won leñol Fulɓe fuu wurti.“ „…Fulɓe fuu Fuuta Tooro puɗɗi, ɗon Ukba
jibbini ɓe. Ɓaawo maajum ɓe peri ɓe cankiti kadi. Ɗum waɗi wuro, ɗum waɗi lesdi.
Abba maɓɓe huuci, nden ɗum ƴummi, kayrugol maɓɓe waɗi fuuna (funnaange) ton. Ɗum
sampiti naʼi ɗuuɗi jamum … Koo moye tefti laawol abba (baaba) muuɗum, … Fulɓe
peri fuuna ngam hiirna maɓɓe ɗum ndiyam Maayo Manngo, woyla maɓɓe ɗum geeŋelle
njaareendi meere walaa ndiyam walaa huɗo, fommbina boo ɗum buubi laayɗe ɓaleeje
cukkuɗe. Fuuna on kadi naʼi maɓɓe keɓata njaayri marndi ndiyam e huɗo. Nii kadi
ɓe perori fuuna, ɓe peroraay lokkere wonnde. Nden kadi ɓikkoy Ukba ngurti Fuuta
Tooro, ɓe ngari ɓe campiti diga (gila) Fuuta Ɓunndu, Fuuta Kinngi, nden ɓe naati
kadi jonta ɗo.“ Ɗum suutaa ko e deftere LʼHistoire des Peuls Férobé du Diamaré,
Maroua et Petté, nde E. Mohammadu yaltini e hitaande 1976 caggal yewtidugol e
wammbaaɓe Fulɓe. Malle, ɗum ko laamateeri Maali ndi Sunnjata Keytaa sincunoo e
teemedannde 13ɓere. Ukba Ben Nafi (maa Uqba Ibn Nafi) laatino mawɗo konu
lislaamiyankeejo e teemedannde 7ɓere. Ko kanko dahi leyɗe Maxribi ɗen. Sikke
alaa, koo ko jantaa ɗoo no haawnii sabu nde tawnoo Ukba Ben Nafi ko Aarabo, ko
ɗemngal aarabu o haalaynoo. Wano non kadi, si o arii Fuuta Tooro o resii debbo
Sarankulleejo, oon kadi ko ɗemngal mum sarankulleere wowlaynoo. Si ɓiɓɓe maɓɓe
ɓen wonii e wowlugol ɗemngal ngal wonaa aarabuure wonaa sarankulleere, e maanaa
fulfulde, sikke alaa ko taweede leñol Fulɓe ngol no woodunoo ko adii nde Ukba
hewti Fuuta Tooro sabu neɗɗo heccataa mawɗo mum. Fahin, e nder winndooɓe daartol
alsilamaaku ɓen, hay e gooto sifaaki jippagol Ukba haa Fuuta Tooro. E ko ɓuri
sikkeede kon, Ukba feƴƴaali leyɗe Maxribi ɗen. Kono non hay si tawii ngol jantol
tuugaaki e ko selli, ngol hollii wonde Fulɓe no mari iwdiiji ɗuuɗuɗi. Ko ɓuri
heewde kon kadi e ko wiɗtotooɓe ɓen woni wiide kon ko ɗum faandii. Henri Lhote,
wiɗtotooɗo faransiijo winndi e deftere mum lʼextraordinaire aventure des Peuls
wonde Fulɓe no jeydi e aynooɓe ɓe nate mumʼen yiʼetee e kaaƴe jeereende Sahara,
wano kaaƴe Tasili. E konngol makko, hiɓe jeydi e leƴƴi ecoppinaaji maa
kushitiyankooji hoɗuɗi funnaange Afirik hannde. Maamiraaɓe ɗiin leƴƴi fow ko
Funnaange Hakkundeeri (Moyen-Orient) iwri ari jillondiri e leƴƴi taakanji.
Wiɗtotooɗo Pullo, Dr. Abuubakri Laam kañum e Misra Kinndi ɓuri tuugaade.
Mukarovsky, wiɗtotooɗo otirisnaajo kadi no sikki helmere misraare hinnde ng
(yeru kelme goʼo ɗe o limti e deftere makko Die Grundlagen des Ful und das
Mauretanische yaltunoonde e hitaande 1963) no jeydi e nagge, e maanaa aynooɓe
naatunooɓe leydi Misra Kinndi no jeyaa e maamiraaɓe Fulɓe. Wiɗtotooɗo faransiijo
Alain Anselain kadi no sikki jeydigal no woodi hakkunde Fulɓe e Misrankooɓe
aranɓe wondude e leƴƴi Afirik Funnaange-Nano. O hollitii ɗum e deftere makko La
Question Peule (1982). Himo tawti e ngon ɗon senngo Henri Lhote mo adi-ɗen
limtude. No woniri woo, Fulɓe senndotaako e leƴƴi Afirik Hiirnaange luttuɗi ɗin,
fahin taariixa maɓɓe anndaaɗo on ko e oon diiwaanu fuɗɗii : ko e laamu Gana fii
Fulɓe fuɗɗaa janteede e nder taariixa, ɓaawo ngun laamu lancike, dawla Fulɓe
arano on, ɗum ko Laam-Tooro maa Tekrur hono no Aarabuuɓe ɓen wi’iraynoo non,
feeñi e daande maayo Senegal. Ko ɗon ɓe iwi ɓe saakitii e nokkeeli heddiiɗi ɗin.
Ɗemngal maɓɓe ngal kadi, fulfulde no jeydi fota wonaa seeɗa e ɗemɗe Afirik
Hiirnaange wano njolfo e sereer, maa ɗemɗe bantu, ɗum no yi’oo e jogagol
fulfulde pelle inɗe (classes nominales) maa e mbaadi yaññugol seekorde gollal
(verbe).



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ndenndaandi

Ndenndaandi (e faransi république, e enngele republic) ko noone dawla renndaaɗo,
dawla mo yimɓe leydi ɓen fow hawtiti jeyi. E liddu, si ko laamuuji finaa-tawaaji
ko neɗɗo gooto e ɓeynguure mu’um, lamɗo on, jeyi leydi ndin fow. Laamu ngun ko
roneteengu iwde baabiraawo faade ɓiɗɗo. Ndenndaandi e haqiiqa on anndaa ronugol
laamu. Si hooreejo leydi on (himo wi’ee kadi persidan) accitii laamu, ko woote
waɗetee, ɓurɗo jogaade yimɓe on halfinee laamu yeru happu. Si happu on timmii
woote waɗee kadi.

Wonnde kala halfere “république” nden, e lasli mayre ko res publica, e maanaa
huunde jamaa, jeyal jamaa firi, dawlaaji heewɗi hannde waawataa wi’eede no
tuugii e demokaraasi sabu hooreeɓe leydi ɓen no jogori leydi ndi ɓe halfinaa
ardungal mu’um wa jeyal maɓɓe kamɓe e ɓeynguure maɓɓe. Ɓe jaɓataa woote waɗee
maa hay si waɗaama wonataa woote laaɓuɗe. Sifa ɗen denndaaɗe no wi’ee denndaaɗe
njaggu: ko neɗɗo gooto maa seeɗa e yimɓe takkiiɓe mo fewjata.

Si ko ndenndaandi tuugiindi e diina, wano almamaaku Fuuta Jaloo, ko seeɗa e
yimɓe annduɓe diina ɓen, almaamiiɓe maa ceernooɓe fewjata. Ndenndaandi
lislaamiyankeeri (wano Iran) kadi no gasa takkeede ɗon. E on ɗon noone, si doole
almaamiiɓe ɓen feƴƴitaali keerol, e misal si suudu depiteeɓe ɓen no jogii doole
aynitugol ɓe, haray no gasa wi’eede demokaraasi maa fewjodal no tawaa e mu’um
seeɗa.



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfaa_Yaayaa

Alfaa Yaayaa Jallo ko lamɗo diiwal Labe wonnoo, fewndo dawla alsilamaaku Fuuta
Jaloo. Diiwal Labe ngal laatino fayda feccere Fuuta Jaloo, hakkee ko ngal
yaajunoo, tentii ɓaawo dahugol leyɗeele janane wano leydi Seɓɓe (Manndinkooɓe)
Ngaabu.

O jibinaa e hitaande 1850, geɗal Kumanco ɓiɗɗo debbo lamɗo Ngaabu on Janke
Waali. O etii sortugol diiwal makko ngal e laamu Timmbo ngun. O tawano e
janfiiɓe Almaami Bookar Biro ɓen. Nde o tawnoo Faransiiɓe ɓen eɓɓii dahugol
Fuuta yewa laamu Almaamiiɓe ɓen, o ndaari no o gollidira e maɓɓe fii no o
danndira laamu makko ngun. Ko nden faljere mawnde heɓunoo ardiiɓe Fuuta ɓen
heewɓe e ngun jamaanu: ɓe anndaa feere bonnde Faransiiɓe ɓen ko "diviser pour
régner" (waddindira laamoo), e maanaa ko addugol lurral hakkunde ɓiɓɓe leydi fii
no joɗɗinira njaggu mun e hoore maɓɓe. Nde Faransiiɓe ɓen foolunoo Bookar Biro
ka hare Pooredaaka e hitaande 1896 ɓe immanii follirgol lamɓe diiwe wallunooɓe
ɓe gooto gooto kanyun e seekugol leyɗe maɓɓe watta pattaloy pattaloy. E hitaande
1905 ɓe janfii Alfaa Yaayaa ɓe egginiri mo Dahome. Ɓaawo ɗun ɓe artiri mo Fuuta
kono o fuɗɗii eɓɓindaade fii dartagol laamu Porto ngun. Portooɓe ɓen huli darja
makko huli wota o murtin leydi ndin. Ɓe nanngiti mo ɓe egginiri mo ngol ɗoo
laawol Moritani. Ko ɗon o faatii e hitaande 1912. 1969 laamu PDG (Seeku Tuuree)
artiri furee makko on kanko e Almaami Saamori Gine. Hiɓe belnaa berɗe Kamerun ka
laamorde Konaakiri. Yimre ngenndiyankoore (Hymne National) Gine nden ko e gimol
"Deemankan" tuugii: ko jeliiɓe Manndinkooɓe yimannoo Alfaa Yaayaa ngol gimol.
Hannde hannde Gine no semmbini fii Alfaa Yaayaa ƴettiri mo wa ŋanaajo leydi ndin
mawɗo kono taariika makko on hollitii wonnde himo tawaa e bonnunooɓe dawla mo
Karamoko Alfaa sincunoo on sabu ko lurre e janfaaji hakkunde yeesooɓe Fuuta ɓen
to qarnu 19aɓo lo'ini tugale on dawla udditani kolonaaku laawol.



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fuuta_Jaloo

Fuuta Jaloo (na Fuuta Jalon) ko leydi doŋi e pelle jeyaandi hannde e Ndenndaandi
Gine. Hindi tummbii hakkunde Gine.

Fuuta Jaloo (leydi Fulɓe e Jalunkeeɓe) no wertii e ko yahata 80.000 Km2. Ɗii ɗoo
nooneeji leydi no tawee e mayri: boowe, ndantaari, hansaŋere, doŋi, pelle,
dunkiiji. Ce’e (teelal: seere) e ayɗe no heewi kadi.

Lenyol ɓurngol ɗuuɗude ngol ko Fulɓe. Hiɓe wowla pular, caltuka fulfulde,
jeyduka e pulaarji Senegal e Gammbiya kono hika jogii mbaadiiji makka heertiiɗi.
Leƴƴi go’o kadi ko Jalunkeeɓe, Jaakankeeɓe, Maninkaaɓe, Konyaagiiɓe, Basariiɓe,
Bajarankeeɓe, ekn. Ko ɗemngal pular ɓuretee wowleede Fuuta Jaloo.

Fuuta Jaloo ko leydi hoɗaandi gila duuɓi guluuji guluuji. Hino sikkaa Fulɓe
aynooɓe fuɗɗino naatude ton gila jamaanu laamateeri Gana e Malle (hakkunde
teeminannde 9aɓere haa 15aɓere. Gooto e murtannooɓe laamateeri Malle ɓen laatino
Pullo no wi’ee Koli Teŋella. Hino sikkaa Koli Teŋella ardu e yimɓe mum haa ka
wi’etee ɗon hannde Telimile, ko ɗon o surraa (ɗum ko e teeminannde 15aɓere). Ka
attorum Fulɓe e lasliiɓe ɓen, ɗum ko Jalunkeeɓe, Soosooɓe e leƴƴi go’o wano
Kisiiɓe e Baagaaɓe, ɓe hoɗiduno e hoore jam, teeŋtii nde tawnoo ɓe fow maɓɓe ko
sanamuuji ɓe rewaynoo. Kono ittude e teeminannde 18aɓere alsilamaaku fuɗɗii
naatude e leydi ndin. Ko Fulɓe iwrunooɓe reedu Maasina wonunoo sabu mum. Nde ɓe
tawnoo ɓe fuɗɗike ɗuuɗude e doolnude, ɓe murtitani Jalunkeeɓe ɓen. Hareeji
jihaadi wulɗi huɓɓi e leydi ndin. Kono juulɓe ɓen heɓi poolgal. Ko ka konu
Talansan, laatinoongu e hitaande 1725 Fulɓe ɓen fooli fes ɓe sinci dawla
almamaaku e ley ardungal Alfaa Ibrahiima Sammbegu, ɓurɗo lollirde Karamoko
Alfaa. Diiwe 9 sincaa. Kannje woni: Timmbo (laamorde nden), Timmbi Tunni,
Keebaali, Koyin, Kollaaɗe, Ɓuriyaa, Foodee Hajji, Fugummbaa, Labe. Diiwal kala
no mari laamɗo mum. Ko Almaami on woni hooreejo Fuuta on fow, hella ka dawrugol
e hella ka diina.



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ful%C9%93e

Pullo (keewal mum ko Fulɓe) ko lenyol aynooɓe (durooɓe) hoɗuɓe e diiwaanuuji
Sahel takko jeereende Sahara. Hiɓe tawee hannde e leyɗe 15 Afirik Hiirnaange,
yoga e majje ko Maali, Senegal, Gine haa leyɗe Afirik Hakkundeeri yeru Caad,
Ndenndaandi Santrafirik e Sudaan. Ko woni sabu ngool saakitagol ko eggudu ndu
aynooɓe ɓen ɗaɓɓiranta naʼi maɓɓe ɗin huɗo e njaram.

Hannde non Fulɓe ko ɓuri heewde koo accii nguurndam egga-hoɗa hino tabiti e
nokkuure wootere hino jokki golleeji wano demal, njulaagu to caʼe mawɗe Afirik
Hiirnaange. Hino woodi e maɓɓe kadi nanngooɓe liƴƴi teeŋtii Senegal-Moritani
(hiɓe wiʼee toon Suubalɓe) maa Gine kanyum e nyeenyuɓe. Hannde ɗuuɗal Fulɓe ko
juulɓe, ɗemngal maɓɓe no wiʼee pular maa pulaar maa fulfulde, hingal jeyaa e
ɗemɗe Hiirnaange-Atlantik.

Ɗunndi Fulɓe ndin anndaaka no selliri sabu leyɗe ɗen woowaa waɗude winndito
leƴƴi. Tuumo ngon hino hakkunde miliyonji 16 e miliyonji 25 haa 26.

Iwdi Fulɓe ndin haa hannde anndaaka no laaɓiri. Annduɓe ɓen hino yeddondira gila
teemedannde jeenayaɓere nden e fii on fiyaaku. Ko woni sabu mum non ko seedugol
Fulɓe ngol e leƴƴi hoɗdaaɗi ɗin to mbaadi. Ko honɗum Fulɓe ɓen tigi wiʼi e on
fiyaaku? E hino ɗoo ko bammbaaɗo (farba) Pullo mo Kamarun jantii: „Ko woni
asngol e leñol Fulɓe fuu ƴoororde muʼum Malle. Pullo kam fuu Malle ƴifti, Pullo
kam fuu woodaa e ƴiwi tonaa Malle. Innde Pullo kam fuu Malle nii ɗoofi. Mone fuu
jammaa (jonnaa yettoore) e laawol, kanjum ɗuuɗini inɗe leʼi (leƴƴi) Fulɓe, amma
koo non fuu, to lencitoraama nii, tawaa Pullo kam fuu Malle ƴoori.“ „Ukba woni
jibbinɗo Fulɓe, puɗɗuɗo leñol maɓɓe, kanko aawi ngol. Kanko boo ɗum Aaraabo,
fuuna o ƴiwi o yehi o jooɗoyi Fuuta Tooro. Ɗon o teʼi (resi) Bajju Maŋgo – woɓɓe
Bajju Maŋga mbiʼiirata mo – mo leñol Sarakulleʼen… O dañi ɓiɓɓe nayo: rewɓe tato
e gorko gooto. Kamɓe ngoni: Deeto, Wayyu, Naasu e Uuruba biʼeteeɗo Aaraabo. Nder
nayo ɓeʼe ko won leñol Fulɓe fuu wurti.“ „…Fulɓe fuu Fuuta Tooro puɗɗi, ɗon Ukba
jibbini ɓe. Ɓaawo maajum ɓe peri ɓe cankiti kadi. Ɗum waɗi wuro, ɗum waɗi lesdi.
Abba maɓɓe huuci, nden ɗum ƴummi, kayrugol maɓɓe waɗi fuuna (funnaange) ton. Ɗum
sampiti naʼi ɗuuɗi jamum … Koo moye tefti laawol abba (baaba) muuɗum, … Fulɓe
peri fuuna ngam hiirna maɓɓe ɗum ndiyam Maayo Manngo, woyla maɓɓe ɗum geeŋelle
njaareendi meere walaa ndiyam walaa huɗo, fommbina boo ɗum buubi laayɗe ɓaleeje
cukkuɗe. Fuuna on kadi naʼi maɓɓe keɓata njaayri marndi ndiyam e huɗo. Nii kadi
ɓe perori fuuna, ɓe peroraay lokkere wonnde. Nden kadi ɓikkoy Ukba ngurti Fuuta
Tooro, ɓe ngari ɓe campiti diga (gila) Fuuta Ɓunndu, Fuuta Kinngi, nden ɓe naati
kadi jonta ɗo.“ Ɗum suutaa ko e deftere LʼHistoire des Peuls Férobé du Diamaré,
Maroua et Petté, nde E. Mohammadu yaltini e hitaande 1976 caggal yewtidugol e
wammbaaɓe Fulɓe. Malle, ɗum ko laamateeri Maali ndi Sunnjata Keytaa sincunoo e
teemedannde 13ɓere. Ukba Ben Nafi (maa Uqba Ibn Nafi) laatino mawɗo konu
lislaamiyankeejo e teemedannde 7ɓere. Ko kanko dahi leyɗe Maxribi ɗen. Sikke
alaa, koo ko jantaa ɗoo no haawnii sabu nde tawnoo Ukba Ben Nafi ko Aarabo, ko
ɗemngal aarabu o haalaynoo. Wano non kadi, si o arii Fuuta Tooro o resii debbo
Sarankulleejo, oon kadi ko ɗemngal mum sarankulleere wowlaynoo. Si ɓiɓɓe maɓɓe
ɓen wonii e wowlugol ɗemngal ngal wonaa aarabuure wonaa sarankulleere, e maanaa
fulfulde, sikke alaa ko taweede leñol Fulɓe ngol no woodunoo ko adii nde Ukba
hewti Fuuta Tooro sabu neɗɗo heccataa mawɗo mum. Fahin, e nder winndooɓe daartol
alsilamaaku ɓen, hay e gooto sifaaki jippagol Ukba haa Fuuta Tooro. E ko ɓuri
sikkeede kon, Ukba feƴƴaali leyɗe Maxribi ɗen. Kono non hay si tawii ngol jantol
tuugaaki e ko selli, ngol hollii wonde Fulɓe no mari iwdiiji ɗuuɗuɗi. Ko ɓuri
heewde kon kadi e ko wiɗtotooɓe ɓen woni wiide kon ko ɗum faandii. Henri Lhote,
wiɗtotooɗo faransiijo winndi e deftere mum lʼextraordinaire aventure des Peuls
wonde Fulɓe no jeydi e aynooɓe ɓe nate mumʼen yiʼetee e kaaƴe jeereende Sahara,
wano kaaƴe Tasili. E konngol makko, hiɓe jeydi e leƴƴi ecoppinaaji maa
kushitiyankooji hoɗuɗi funnaange Afirik hannde. Maamiraaɓe ɗiin leƴƴi fow ko
Funnaange Hakkundeeri (Moyen-Orient) iwri ari jillondiri e leƴƴi taakanji.
Wiɗtotooɗo Pullo, Dr. Abuubakri Laam kañum e Misra Kinndi ɓuri tuugaade.
Mukarovsky, wiɗtotooɗo otirisnaajo kadi no sikki helmere misraare hinnde ng
(yeru kelme goʼo ɗe o limti e deftere makko Die Grundlagen des Ful und das
Mauretanische yaltunoonde e hitaande 1963) no jeydi e nagge, e maanaa aynooɓe
naatunooɓe leydi Misra Kinndi no jeyaa e maamiraaɓe Fulɓe. Wiɗtotooɗo faransiijo
Alain Anselain kadi no sikki jeydigal no woodi hakkunde Fulɓe e Misrankooɓe
aranɓe wondude e leƴƴi Afirik Funnaange-Nano. O hollitii ɗum e deftere makko La
Question Peule (1982). Himo tawti e ngon ɗon senngo Henri Lhote mo adi-ɗen
limtude. No woniri woo, Fulɓe senndotaako e leƴƴi Afirik Hiirnaange luttuɗi ɗin,
fahin taariixa maɓɓe anndaaɗo on ko e oon diiwaanu fuɗɗii : ko e laamu Gana fii
Fulɓe fuɗɗaa janteede e nder taariixa, ɓaawo ngun laamu lancike, dawla Fulɓe
arano on, ɗum ko Laam-Tooro maa Tekrur hono no Aarabuuɓe ɓen wi’iraynoo non,
feeñi e daande maayo Senegal. Ko ɗon ɓe iwi ɓe saakitii e nokkeeli heddiiɗi ɗin.
Ɗemngal maɓɓe ngal kadi, fulfulde no jeydi fota wonaa seeɗa e ɗemɗe Afirik
Hiirnaange wano njolfo e sereer, maa ɗemɗe bantu, ɗum no yi’oo e jogagol
fulfulde pelle inɗe (classes nominales) maa e mbaadi yaññugol seekorde gollal
(verbe).



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nelson_Manndelaa

Nelson Rolihlahla Manndelaa lollirɗo Madibaa mo winndere ndee kala woyata hannde
oo, pollunooɗo laamuyel paltoor to Afrik worgo, welditini ɓesngu mum, jibinaa ko
ñalnde 18 sulyee 1918; o faatii ko ñalnde 5 desaambar 2013 to Johanesburg, woni
o wuurii duuɓi 95 (heen 27 e lebbi 6 e balɗe 6 ko e kasoo.) O ɓuri lollirde ko
darnde makko ngam rimɗinde e haɓaade senndindiral leƴƴi to Afrik Worgo hono ko
anndiraa apartaayd woni njuɓɓudi politik tuugiindi e ceerndugol eddaaji leƴƴi.

Nelson Manndelaa naati e parti biyeteeɗo African National Congress (ko anndiraa
ANC) ko e hitaande 1944. Naatni mo heen ko yiɗde haɓaade njiimaandi e
senndindiral leƴƴi anndiraangal innde apartayd ngal raneeɓe tabitintunoo toon e
leydi hee.

Ñaawoore Rivonia waɗi ko hakkunde oktoobar 1963 e suwee 1964. Ko hoohooɓe ANC 10
ñaawetenoo ɗoon : Nelson Manndelaa, Walter Sisulu, Ahmed Kathrada, Govan Mbeki,
Dennis Goldberg, Raymon Mhlaba, Lionel Bernstein, James Kantor, Elias Motsoaledi
e Andrew Mlangeni. Ina jeyaa e ko ɓe njooɓtoranoo kadi jaɓɓugol sariya kaɗɗo
marucaagu. Caggal kasoo muusɗo, juutɗo, sibu ko duuɓi 27 e lebbi 6 e balɗe
jeegom haa njahdi e naange. O woppitaa, no nganndir-ɗen ko ñalnde 11 feebariyee
1990.

Ko Manndelaa sokaa koo fof, winndere ndee ina ɓeydoo daranaade goppitgol makko
kam e ittugol apartaayde. Kaaɗtudi majjum ko hiirde waɗnoonde e suwee 1988 to
Wembly, nde naalankooɓe heewɓe winndere ndee tawtoraa, nde fotde teemedere
miliyoŋ njeeɓi e teleeji mum en, nder 67 leydi ; hiirde hollittunoonde kasoo
Manndelaa e kiiɗal pawingal e ɓesngu Afrik worgo. E miijo ANC nii ko kayre
yaawni goppitgol Manndelaa , sibu, ñalnde 7 desaambar 1988, o yamiraa hootde
galle makko, kono tawa o yaltataa ɗum. E 1989 o winndi Pieter Botha, o wiyi
ɗum : « wonaa goppitgol am ɓuri himmude », « musiiba oo ko leydi pecciindi pecce
ɗiɗi gañondirɗe, barondirooje », o wiyi « njiɗ-mi ko yo pelle ɗiɗi ɓurɗe mawnude
e leydi ndii kaaldu », ɗeen ngoni ANC e laamu Apartaayd. O haali toɓɓe ɓurɗe
teeŋtude potɗe yeewteede ɗee : « go’o, tabintingol doosgal keewndi e nder dowla
gootiɗɗo ; ɗiɗi, kulhuli raneeɓe leydi ndii mbaawi jogaade e ɗuum ». Ñalnde 5
suwee 1989 ɓe potti to galle Botha. Kono e daawal hakkunde ngal, o rafaa, de
Klerk lomtii mo e ngardiigu laamu nguu.

Kaaldigal wonaa tan termondirde e gaño mum, kono kadi ko waasde taƴondirde e
sehilaaɓe mum ɓooyɓe ɓe winndere ndee ñiŋatnoo. Yeru, nde Bil Kilinton ari Afrik
worgo e hitaande 1998, Nelson Manndelaa siftinii mo wonde Dental Amerik
wallittunoo ndeen ko Apartaayd, tawi woɗɓe ina mballita hare luulndiinde
apartaayd. Manndelaa wiyi « gooto e hooreeɓe leyɗe mo ngadii-mi bismaade ɗoo ko
Fidel Kastoroo … mi bismii ma kadi Muammaar Kaddaafi. Waɗi mi waɗde ɗum, ko e
aada amen, woppude wallitnooɓe ma e saanga nde ngon-ɗaa e caɗeele ɓurɗe mawnude
e nguurndam, ko huunde soofnde ».



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jost_Gippert

Jost Gippert ko nyannde 12 mars 1956 e nokku wi’eteeɗo Hattingen jibinaa. Nden
nokkuure hari ko Winz-Niederwenigern wietenoo. Ko o Allemandjo, experjo
"causasiologue", ko wallifotooɗo (winndoowo) profeserjo fii eɓɓindirgol ɗenɗe,
ko ɗun inni mo "linguiste comparativiste"; himo golla ka universitee Goethe
Francfort.

E hitaande 1972 o waɗi baccalaureat makko on ka lycee Leibniz, Essen e nder
Allemagne. Ontuma, gila 1972 haa 1977 o janngi ka Universitee Marburg e ka
"Universitee libre" Berlin; o janngi ton fii eɓɓindirgol ɗenɗe, o janngi ɗenɗe
Ennduuɓe, ɗenɗe Japoneeɓe et ɗenɗe Sinuwaaɓe. O heɓi Doctorat (PhD) makko on e
1977. Ɗun ko rawnorɗun recherche makko "syntax of infinitival formations in the
Indo-European languages". Gila 1977 haa 1990 hari himo jannude, o waɗa
recherche, o jonna konferenceji ka universiteeji Berlin, Vienne e Salzburg. Ko o
wonnoo Assistant e poste wi’eteeɗo "Oriental Computational Linguistics" e
hitaande 1991 o waɗi habilitation makko on ka Universite Bamberg e theme
wi’eteeɗo "Iranian loanwords in Armenian and Georgian".



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Limlebbi

E sahaa hannde oo, yoga e pine kuutortoo ko lemlebbi biyeteeɗo
limlebbi «Grégoire» oo, woni ko mbiyatenlimlebbi tuubakooɓe koo. Juulɓe kadi ina
njogii limlebbi mum en, mo kuutorto-ɗen enen fulɓe. Pine keewɗe ina njogii
limlebbi mum en keeriiɗi, kono yoga heen nattii huutoreede. Hannde ɓuri waawde
huutoreede e winndere ndee kala ko limlebbi « tuubakooɓe » oo. Limlebbi ɗii ɓuri
heewde tuugaade ko e dille lewru wallanaange, walla ɗiɗi ɗii kala. Ina woodi
goɗɗi ɓurɗi jiiɓaade. Maa mbiyaa leyɗe winndere ndee kala kuutortoo ko limlebbi
Grégoire oo wonande soklaaji ɗi ngonaa soklaaji diine.

Limlebbi « Grégoire » (limlebbi tuubakooɓe) oo tuugii ko e dille naange, mo
juulɓe oo tuugii ko e dille lewru. Kono kañji ɗiɗi kala ɗi tuugii ko e yontere
nde balɗe 7 elebbi 12 e nder hitaande. Mo “tuubakooɓe” oo ƴetti fuɗde mum ko e
yonta kerecee(jibineede annabi Iisaa), mo juulɓe oo ƴetti fuɗde mum ko e fergo
nulaaɗosallallaahu aleyhi wa sallam (JKM).

Ina gasa tawa fulɓe ina njoginoo limlebbi, kono enen kam e keɓaani anndude oon
limlebbi. Eɗen nganndi tan, eɗen njoganinoo balɗe jeeɗiɗi yontere (woni
biir) ɗee inɗe, ɗeen ngoni : hoore biir, dewo hoore biir, aaɓnde, moobaare,
njaslaare, naasaande, mawnde. Kono hannde fulɓe ɓuri waawde huutoraade ko inɗe
garduɗe e diine lislaam ɗee, hono, aset, alet, altine, talaata, alarba,
alkmiisa, aljumaa.Wonande lebbi, kuutortono-ɗen ko lebbi lislaam ɗii hade
kesamkesaagu naatde, inɗe ɗiin lebbi ngoni : haaraan, dewo haaraan, ekn...

Ko kesamkesaagu naati koo, yimɓe fof (walla kam jotondirɓe e nguun kesam-kesaagu
ɓee) mbaɗti huutoraade limlebbi mo winndere ndee kala huutortoo oo, limlebbi
« Grégoire » mo inɗe lebbi mum mbiyetee : saawiyee, feebariyee, marse, abriil,
mee, suwee, sulyee, ut, settaambar, oktoobar, noowammbar, desammbar.Hay leyɗe
aaraabeeɓe ko kañji kuutortoo so artii e haajuuji ɗi ngonaa haajuuji diine. Ɓe
ndewata kadi ko e inɗe goowaaɗe ɗee. E kitaale jawtuɗe ɗeya, banndiraaɓe men
wonnooɓe to Keer (laamorgo Misra) pentaniino ɗiiɗoo lebbi inɗe. Ɗeen inɗe
ngoni :siilo, colte, mbooy, seeɗto, duujal, korse, morso, juko, silto, yarkomaa,
jolal, bowte, kono ɗe kuutortee tan ko e diiwaan Fuuta Tooroo hee ; yanti heen,
pulfule keddiiɗe ɗee keɓtinaani ɗe, sibu ɗe ndiiwtanooma e joɗnde MAPE (Gollordu
gootinɗingol Manndeŋ-Fulfulde) jooɗinoonde e lewru suwee hitaande 1982
toWagadugu.

Limlebbi diine oo (Hijriyya, woni fergo), fawii, no mbiyruno-ɗen, ko jiyle
lewru, ɗum noon lewru ko balɗe 29 walla 30. Kañji ngoni ɗi mbiyaten lebbi
ɓaleeɓe, hono : ‘Mouharram’ (haaraan), ‘Safar’ (dewo haaraan), Rabia al
awal (mawluud), Rabia ath-thani (dewo mawluud), Joumada al oula, Joumada
ath-thania, Rajab (mawnum
yaawa), Chaabane (yaawa), Ramadan (koorka), Chawwal (humtoraandu), Dhou al
qi`da (saftoraandu), Dhou al-hijja (taaske). Ko ɗi lebbi jirlotooɗi, yeru koorka
ina waawi hawrude e dumunnaaji hitaande ɗii kala, hawra e ndunngu, hawra e
ceeɗu, hawra e dabbunde … E ndii limlebbi, so hiisaama hakindo e nder duuɓi
capanɗe tati deggondirɗe, hitaande wonata ko 354,36667 ñalawma. Ɗum noon
hitaande kala, balɗe 10 walla 11 haa 12 ina ɓiloo hakkunde makko e limlebbi
winndereejo oo, mo nganndu-ɗaa hitaande mum ko balɗe 365,2425 : ɗuum addani
feebariyee maayirde balɗe 28 duuɓi tati deggondirɗi (kitaale 365 ñalawma),
maayra 29 hitaande nayaɓere ndee (hitaande 366 ñalawma : ñalawma ɓeydiiɗo heen
oo, ko nayaɓe 4 kitaale nay ɗe kiisanooka ɗee, ndenndinaa). Kitaale baɗɗe balɗe
366 ko kitaale « ɗe 4 feccata kono ɗe 100 feccataa » walla kitaale ɗe « 400
peccata ». Yeru : 2014 ko balɗe 365 (feebariyee maayrata ko 28) sibu « 4
feccataa 2014 », kono 2016 ko balɗe 366 (feebariyee maayrata ko 29) sibu « 4 ina
fecca 2016 ».

To bannge ganndal siyaas, hitaande ko mudda Leydi men ndii taartotoo naange haa
arta e tolno umminoo oo. Ɗuum woni ko wiyetee « hitaande ŋorol » (balɗe
365,2422) tee ina seɓondiri seeɗa e hitaande limlebbi iiseejo (balɗe 365,2425).
Ɗe ɓurondiri ko 0,0003 ñalawma hitaande kala (woni ɓurondiral balɗe tati duuɓi
10 400 kala).



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lansana_Konte

O jibinaa heedde 1934 e hoɗo no wi'ee Buraamayaa (woɓɓe no wi'a ko Lummbayaa) e
nder diiwal Dobirikaa, leydi daande baharu ndin. Ko ɗon o janngi e duɗal
Alqur'aana o naati kadi lekkol kono no sikkaa o feƴƴaali duɗal aranal ngal.
Ɓaawo ɗum Lansana Konte yahri e lekkolji ekkitorɗi miniteeriyaagal Bingerville
(Koddiwaar) e Sen-Luwii (Senegal).

E hitaande 1955 o naati ka larme Faransi o nawraa Aljeri fewndo konu wonande
hettaare ndin leydi e hitaande 1957. Caggal ɗum Konte hooti Gine, tawi leydi
ndin heɓtii hoore mum e kolonaaku Faransi nyannde 2 uktuubar (yarkomaa) 1958. O
naati e nder larme Gine on o wallitii semmbingol mo. Ɓaawo miniteeriiɓe
Portokeesiiɓe e dartiiɓe laamu Gineyankeeɓe yanii e leydi ndin nyannde 22
nuwambar (jolal) 1970 e dow anniyee liɓugol laamu hooreejo-leydi on Seeku
Tuuree, Konte hino tawanoo e wallitiiɓe danndugol leydi ndin. Ko ɗum waɗi o
ɓeydanaa garaadu o waɗaa kapiten 1971. E hitaande 1973 Konte waɗaa kumaandan
diiwal Boke ngal, takkiingal Gine-Bisaawo, leydi laatinoondi on tuma no haɓee
fii sortugol hoore mum e kolonaaku Portokeesi'en, tawi kadi Gine no tammbitii
fedde PAIGC, laatinoonde hino ardii ngon cippiro.

Nyannde 26 maarasi (mbooyi) 1984 Persidan Seeku Tuuree feƴƴini. Yimɓe makko ɓen
woni e pooɗondirgol laamu ngun haa larme on tawi ko maa ƴetta ngu fii wota hare
ɓiɓɓe leydi huɓɓu. Njuɓɓudi laamu inneteendi CMRN (Conseil Militaire de
Redressement National, e Pular: Teekun Miniteeri wonande Feewnitaare Leydi)
sincaa. Lansana Konte, tawi nden o wontiino kolonel, waɗaa hooreejo teekun on, e
maanaa o laati hooreejo-leydi Gine. Wondiɗɗo makko on Jaraa Tarawore laatii
jaggo (Premier Ministre). Fillitaama wonndema ko Jara Tarawore adanoo toɗɗeede
kono o salii, o wi'i wonndema nde tawnoo Seeku Tuuree, lamɗo fawnooɗo laamu
sattungu e jamaa on ko Maninkaajo, haanaa ka kanko Jara Tarawore Maninkaajo go'o
kadi halfinee laamu. Ko non laamu ngun yaniri e Lansana Konte, ɓurnooɗo duuɓi on
hakkunde maɓɓe. Kono neeɓaali fota kamɓe ɗiɗo ɓe fuɗɗii lurrude e fii laamu
ngun. Nyannde 4 yuliyuhu (morso) 1985, tippude e ko wi'aa kon, Jara Tarawore
etii hippagol laamu ngun tawi Lansana Konte hino yahi Lome (laamorde Togo) e
kawrital leyɗe CEDEAO/ECOWAS (kawtital leyɗe Afirik Hiirnaangeeri e baŋŋe
ngaluuji-leydi). kippugu laamu (coup d'État) ngun fogi, Tarawore e yimɓe mum ɓen
wondude e yimɓe laamu Seeku Tuuree sokanooɓe wano Siyaaka Tuuree, Ismaa'iila
Tuuree, Maamadii Keyta, Muusaa Jakite ekn. nanngaa fellaa. Fahin ofisiyeeɓe
Maninkaaɓe heewɓe waraa e ɗum. Yimɓe lancooɓe yani e galleeji e jawle Maninkaaɓe
Konakiri bonni. Ɗen balɗe ɗon Konte yewti jamaa on ka Palais du Peuple o ewnii
ɓe e haala Sooso: "wo fataara", ko ɗum woni "on tewi". Haa hannde Lansana Konte
no jokki felireede ɗin konnguɗi. E haqiiqa on, haa hannde hay gooto faltaaki ko
laaɓi kon ko feƴƴunoo fewndo ko wi'aa Gine gila on tuma "Coup Diarra".

Ɓaawo ɗon Konte ɓurɗi tamude laamu ngun o hawtindiri taaqa hooreejo-leydi e
ministir defansi. Kono e hitaande 1992, tawi hoodere demokaraasi no fuɗɗii
jalbude e leyɗeele ɗuuɗɗe winndere nden, tawi kadi hooreeɓe opozisiyon on
(feddeeji dartiiɗi laamu ngun) e nder Gine tigi wano Alfaa Konnde, Siraaju
Jallo, Baa Mammadu fuɗɗike ƴamude uddital e baŋŋe polotigi, Konte newnani ɗuuɗal
partiiji. Woote waɗaa nyannde 19 dujambar (bowte) 1993. Fedde makko wi'aande PUP
(Parti pour l'Unité et le Progrès, e Fulfulde: Fedde fii Pottal e Yahrugol
yeeso) fooli, Lansana Konte lutti persidan. Wano non kadi o fooli woote 14
dujambar 1998 e dujambar 2003. Lasindiiɓe buy no sikki wonnde ko e dow kansugol
Konte fooliri ɗin wooteeji fow.



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seek_umar_taal

Seek Umar Taal jibinaa ko 1794 to Halwaar, saraaji Podoor. O naati Tijjanaagal
law, tee alaa ɗo o ɗannanaaki ngam ɗaɓɓude ganndal. O fuɗɗorii fof ko Hamdallaay
(Mali) e hitaande 1927, caggal ɗum o fayi Sokoto (Niiseriyaa) to Muhammed Bello,
mo o tawi ina woni e laamaandi mum njooɗndi njuɓɓudi sanne. O ummii ɗoon o
yaaɓani Makka. O yettoyii Makka ko e hitaande 1828. Ko toon o heɓi tiitoonde
kaliifu tijjanaagal wonande Sudaan (noon aarabeeɓe mbiyatnoo Afrik hirnaange
hannde oo) e juuɗe Seek Muhammed el Gaali, jahdiiɗo Seek Tijjaan. Ndeen o yahi
haa duɗal jaaɓi haaɗtirde biyeteengal Al-Azhaar. Ko toon o ɓenndini feere makko
umminde jihaadi so o artii.

Ɓe neldi konu ngam heɓtude Tummbuktu, kono ɓe ndonkani. Kaɓɓondiral konuuji
fulɓe e safalɓe Kunta en e Bammbara en njani e konu Seek Umar. Oon sahaa tawi
laamu makko yaajii sibu tuggi ko Mali haa Gine haa Senegaal. Kono caggal wolde
Hamdallay konu jihaadi nguu waasii yimɓe heewɓe, tee ɓe tampii, ɓe ndañaani
fooftaade ngam safrude ñawanɗe maɓɓe e yuɓɓitinde konu, tawi ɓe njanaama. Seek
Umar kadi tawi nulii Alfaa Tijjaan, ganndo golwole, gooto e ardinooɓe konu makko
yo yah yiyloyaade koninkooɓe. Oon nde artata, tawi, ñalnde 12 feebariyee 1864,
Seek Umar wirniima e kaaƴe Bañnjagara. Alfaa Tijjaani Aamadu Taal lomtii mo e
ngardiigu laamaandi ndii, sompi laamorgo mum ɗo Bañnjagara ɗoo. Ɓiyiiko (Ɓiy
Seek Umar Taal) biyeteeɗo Aamadu Seeku oo noon laamiima Segu haa nde koloñaal
itti ɗum ɗoon e hitaande 1893.Texte en indice Iwdi



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saydu_Nuuru_Taal

Ceerno Saydu Nuuru Taal yiyi aduna ko e hitaande 1862 to Ñooro to Mali. Jibnaaɗo
makko gorko wiyetenoo ko Nuuru Sayko Umar, ɓiy Usmaan, ɓiy Alfaa Sammba to wuro
men Halwaar sara Podoor nder Senegal.

Ceerno Saydu Nuuru Taal ko ɓiy Nuuru, ɓiy Raamatullaay, ɓiy Muhamadu Bello, ɓiy
Usmaan Dan Foodiya (Fojoo : laamɗo Kano to Ndenndanndi Nijeriya hannde), ɓiy
Njobbo Usmaan, ɓiy Saalih, ɓiy Haaruuna, ɓiy Muhamadu Guurɗo, ɓiy Muhamadu
Sammba, ɓiy Ayuub, ɓiy Masiraan, ɓiy Buubu Baaba, ɓiy Muusaa Jokkolo (ummoriiɗo
Fuuta Tooro), ɓiy Baaba, Ɓiy Hayaas, ɓiy Yugu, ɓiy Jam, ɓiy Jamliige, ɓiy Jooke,
ɓiy Jaalige, ɓiy Diinga, ɓiy Daate, ɓiy Maxaama, ɓiy Uŋbata bun Nafi (gooto e
hoohooɓe taarinooɓe Muhammadu Nullaɗo Alla, garnooɗo jaaynude Lislaam nder
Afrik.

Ko e njiylawu ganndal o woni almuudo Ceerno Hammaat Kan to Madiina Kaaso, e
Aamadu Muttaar Saako to Ɓoggee e Alhajji Maali Sih to Tiwaawoon. Nde wonnoo ko o
peertuɗo moƴƴo hakkille, o yaawii huñaade Deftere Alla nde, o dalii law. O
fuɗɗii jaŋgude ganndal diineeji, Sariya, doosɗe celluka arab, ekn… O fawi heen
gannde jowitiiɗe “Kimiya” to duɗal Ceerno Muhamadu Oolal to wuro Kitaa nder
Mali.

Ko noon kadi, to Ɓoggee, nde Ceerno Saydu Nuuru Taal ɓaari e duɗal Ceerno
Muttaar Saako. Nde ɓe ceertata, o winndani mo seedataagal, o duwanii mo jam e
kisal, nde yimɓe keɗotoo mo kala nde o ƴefti konngol omo waajoo. O winndi e
seedantaagal hee : “Ceerno Alhajji Maalik Sih mo Tiwaawoon tawi mawnii, wiyii
mo : jotondiral men wayi ko no ngal hakkunde Muhammadu Nulaaɗo Alla (Jam e kisal
e mum) e Abuubakiri, mbay-ɗen ko no Muusaa waynoo e Haaruuna, mi waɗii ma dono
am to banngal hakilantaagal”.

Darjeende cehilaagal Ceerno Saydu Nuuru Taal e Lepold Sedaar Senngoor alaa mo
humpi. Hakkunde maɓɓe ko nuunɗal e giɗli. Ngal tuugnii ko e giɗli maɓɓe e
Senegaal kam e darnde safrude caɗeele mayri. Won hinnde sanɗaaji inniranoo mo.
Ñalnde ɓeen ɓaarata to duɗal toowngal, Senngoor wiyi : “Minen haɓantenooɓe
jeytaare ngenndi, Alhajji Saydu Nuuru hollii humpito mum e yimɓe e kuuje,
addanii min ballal mum e ngenndiyaŋkaagal mum. O jaŋnginii min yankinaare e kala
nde kuule mawɗe ƴeftatee, e jaambaraagal nder kareele amen… Ko o daarorgal
yankinaare e moƴƴere, udditaare hakkille, gannduɗo Saydu Nuuru Taal fof
yankinanto ɗum, jaɓantu ɗum, yooɗete ɗum, hulat ɗum, hooloto ɗum…”.

Ko e hitaande 1864 biyeteeɗo Al Hajji Seydu Nuuru Taal jibinaa to nokku ina
wiyee Muniya. Baaba makko wiyetee ko Muhammaad Nuuru, yumma makko Aysata
Kamisoko (Yo yurmeende Alla won e maɓɓe). Caggal nde o janngi e seernaaɓe
heewɓe, o fayi Fuuta abbaade mawniiko Aamadu Muntagaa, ɓiy kaaw makko Muntagaa
Seek Umar to Ɓoggee, Muritani. Kanko woni taanum Seek Umar gidiiɗo artude Fuuta
Tooro. Ɗoon o naati duɗal Ceerno Aamadu Muttaar Saako, ɗoon e wuro Ɓoggee hee.
Ko ɗoon o woni haa oon duwanii mo, rokki mo seedantaagal makko. E ngaal
seedantaagal, Ceerno Aamadu Muttaar Saako, winndi heen : “miɗo seedtoo wonde
alaa fof ko weñii ko njiy-mi e ɓiɗɗo tedduɗo hono Seydu ɓiy Seek Umar (Yo kisal
Alla won e makko) e ɗiiɗoo duuɓi 8 ɗi o janngi ɗoo. Ko o woni ɗoo koo fof o
nehii ko nehdi almuudo, hay so tawii noon mi haɗiino mo ɗuum sabu hiisaade o
ummii ko ɗo teddi, so e Seek Umar al Fuutiyyu, kono o jaabii kam, o wiyi wonaa
miin o waɗanta ɗuum, ko hoore makko o gollantoo. Gila nde nan-mi ɗuum e hunuko
makko, ɓernde am deeƴi, nduwani-moo-mi udditaare hakkille e ganndal nafowal. Mi
seerataa e duwanaade mo jamma e ñalawma mbele Alla ina moƴƴa e makko, rokka mo
balɗe juutɗe, o wona cuɓaaɗo hakkunde yimɓe, ɗo o waawi wonde fof.” Seedantaagal
ngal siifaa ko ñalnde 5 sulyee 1916 (10 Saabaan 1332 Hijriyya).



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Misiide_%C6%81amtaare

Misiide Ɓamtaare, ko lowre ɓamtal diina e pinal ka ɗemngal pulaar/fulfulde, nde
sincaa ko ñannde 01/01/2013 nde fuɗɗii golle e lewru fabraa’iru (Colte) ndun. Ko
tawde hari lowe pulaar e ɗuuɗude ka jowlol enternet, lowre hertinanaande fii
diina tan woodaaka ; si men eɓɓi fampagol Misiide Ɓamtaare, ngam haali-pulaar en
heɓa ka jannga fii diina, e pine wondude e gannde kese, e ko nanndi.

Lasli innde inden: Innde lowre men nden ko e Misiide woni ko eggaa, innde
lollunde fuuta Jaloo, anndirteende innde nokkuure ka juulirde mawnde nden woni
ɗon, ɓe wi’a ɗum: “Ka misiide”. Misiide non ko ɗaɗol eggaangol e Arab Masjid
(juulirde). Tawde non lowre men nden ko fii diina e pinal ɓuri dolnorde, waɗi si
men suɓii ndee innde Misiide Ɓamtaare.

Geɓe Misiide nden: Misiide Ɓamtaare hina jogii geɓe ɗiɗi e lowe fewndo ɗoo, ko
kanje woni les ɗoo :

1.Misiide Pulaar nden : Ko kayre woni lowre lasliire nden, ko ɗon kala huunde
yowondire e pulaar/fulfulde walla laten (faransiire, engeleere, ekn) yowetee,
immorde e winndannɗe haa e ko nanndi. Jokkorde mayre nden ko nii :
www.misiide.com

2.Misiide Arab nden : Fii ka musiɓɓe men fulɓe e yiɗuɓe pine fulɓe tawayɓe
ɗigginaa pulaar ngal fotta, ɓe jannga winndannɗe Misiide nden e ɗemngal Arab. Ko
wano non kadi fii ka defte mawɓe men ɓen yeeɓee dankitee, tawde geɓe ɗuuɗuɗe e
ɗen defte ko e Arabu winndiraa. Jokkorde ngal geɓal Misiide Arab ko nii :
www.misiide.com/ar Ko ɓeyditugol tun ɗum ɗoo /ar yeeso lowre lasliire nden
www.misiide.com

Dunce Misiide ɗen Misiide Ɓamtaare hina jogii noone ɗiɗi e dunce: Ko dunce daɓɓe
(Court terme), e dunce woɗɗuɗe (long terme).

1)Dunce daɓɓe ɗen: 1.Misiide Defte: Wallifaade Saggitorɗe (dicos), ñaldinkooje
(calendrier), Terminolooziiji, defte diina e pine fulɓe, defte gannde kese
(informatique), e ko nanndi.

2.Misiide Media: Himo peccii ɗiɗi: Widiyoo (mbodo) e ojoo. Ko ngal duncal woni
ko kippata yaltinnde kasetaaji jewte diina e pine (bayaanaaji, taali e tinndi,
naamuuji fulɓe ekn), e tinndinooje (tutoriels) gannde kese, e tafude ɓeɗi (cd) e
fannu kala, e ko nanndi.

2)Dunce woɗɗuɗe ɗen 3.Misiide duɗal: Miijo fii sincude duɗal jannginirgal diina
e pulaar, hinde peccii ɗiɗi kayre kadi: Wootere nden ko ka enternet, ndeya nden
ka yaasi si Alla muuyii.

4.Misiide Magazine: Ngam yaltinnde ɓatakal (journal) lewru bee walla lebbi ɗiɗi
bee-no feere mun heɓori woo- men waɗa hen piiji ndan: Diina, pinal, renndo,
taariika, fillayee, ballafuyee, kumpite, jalniika, taali e tinndi, jiɓi-liɓi,
gannde kese, lesɗe e ca’e fulɓe, kawre (rencontres), e ko nanndi. Hara ngal
sennditete e leydi kala ka jangoowo hittinɗo fii pulaar/fulfulde woniri e
windere nden.

5.Misiide Rajoo: Si Alla salaaki, misiide nden sincay rajoo mawnuɗo tawa ko
pulaar tan yewtetee ton, hara kadi ka haali-pulaar jo wontirii woo, o henndoto
kañum rajoo on, o heɗitoo.

Jokkorɗe amen: Ngam humpondiral ngal newoo hakkundeeji men, misiide nden hino
sinci konte (comptes) ɗuuɗuɗe gasayɗe newinnde jokkondiral e Musiide Ɓamtaare,
ko kanje woni ɗee ɗoo: -Imeel amen on ko: misiidemedia@gmail.com Tonngoode nden
ko: +212 6 74 38 41 11 facebook twitter Youtube



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bookar_Biro

Buubakar Biro maa Bookar Biro ko almaamiijo sakkitoro on Fuuta Jaloo. Ko o
geɗaljo Almaami Umaru e Neene Jaarii'u. O etino bonnitugol maa ɗuytugol
jeyal-hoore ngal diiwe Fuuta ɗen joginoo ngal e tiiɗingol laamu Timmbo ngun. O
darniri non laamu njaggu ngu woowanooka Fuuta. Ko ɗun waɗi Bookar Biro haɓidi e
ko ɓurnoo kon e hooreeɓe Fuuta ɓen fewndo ngun jamaanu wano Alfaa Yaayaa lamɗo
Labe on. Ɗun hawri kadi e fuɗɗagol Porto naatugol e leydi ndin, sabu on tuma
hari leyɗe takkiiɗe Fuuta ɗen fow yanii e laamu kolonaaku. Ɓayti Bookar Biro
hawrii e Faransiiɓe ɓen ka hare Pooredaaka (hannde ɗun ko e perefektiir Maamun
woni) nuuwambur 1896, hooreeɓe Fuuta ɓen fow salii wallude mo. Tawi kadi
Portooɓe ɓen no ɓuri aalaaji hare kelɗuɗi. Ko ɗon Bookar Biro foolaa waraa
kanyun e wonndiɓɓe mun. Ko ɗon hettaare Fuuta nden timmi, Fuuta wattaa e nder
koloni wi'eteeɗo Rivières du Sud, wontoyɗo ɓaawi ɗon seeɗa Guinée Francaise.
Almamaaku Bookar Biro ngun hawriduno e murtal Hubbuuɓe ngal, do'unoongal
yirbinde laamu Fuuta ngun.



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lagine

Gine (e Fulfulde Maasina, Lagine; e faransiire République de Guinée) ko leydi e
Afirik Hirnaangeeri. Hindi kernidi e leyɗe ɗee ɗoo: Sarliyon, Labiriyaa,
Koddiwaar, Maali, Senegal e Gine-Bisaawo. Noone laamu mayri ko ndenndaandi (ko
wi'etee kadi repibliiki). Hooreejo leydi ndin ko Lansana Konte innetee, Hooreejo
guwerneman maa Permiyee Ministir on laatii Lansana Kuyaate gila lewru fabraa'ilu
2007 (caggal murtital jamaa on) haa 20 maayuhu 2008. On tuma Persidan Lansana
Konte itti Kuyaate watti Ahmadu Tijjaani Suwaare.

Kapital ngal, e maanaa laamorde nden, ko Konaakiri, ca'e mawɗe go'o ko wano
Kinndiyaa, Maamun, Labe, Kankan, Zerekore ekn. Mbertudi ndin ko 250.158 km²,
jamaa on no yona miliyonji 11,5 (2014) haa sappo (anndaaka tigi tigi sabu ko
ɗuuɗi e ɓiɓɓe Gine ɓen dogii leydi mun ndin). Gine laatino kalfaandi Faransi
ittude 1898 (hitaande nanngegol Almaami Saamori Tuuree) haa nyannde 2 ottoombur
1958, nyalaande hettaare Gine nden. Hooreejo leydi arano on ko Ahmed Seeku
Tuuree (1922-1984). Ɗemngal laamu ngal ko faransi, ɗemɗe leƴƴi leydi ndin ko
Sooso, Pular, Maninka, Kisi, Tooma, Berse, Konyagi, Basari, Bajaranke, Baagaa,
Lanndumaa ekn. kono ko ɗemɗe tati arane ɗen ɓuretee haaleede. Gine hino tawaa e
kawtite leyɗe wano ONU, CEDEAO, UA.

Maanditaare (anniversary) fayɓe waranooɓe nyannde 22 Siilo ɓen ɓadtike. Taw si
woodii ko waylii gila Lansana Kuyaate toɗɗaa hooreejo jaagorɓe ɓaawo nde
teemeɗɗe fayɓe waraa, waɗtaa haako nyaayaako? Gila Gine heɓti jeytaare e
hitaande 1958, Seeku Tuuree laamii, Ginenaaɓe woowti toonyeede waree, tawa hay
huunde suusaa ŋaanyaade. Seeku Tuuree wari ko wari koo fow, ɓurɓe ɓee ko Fulɓe
toonyanoo waraa, gila annduɓe rewi e marɓe faa e kelɗuɓe buy o wari, haa hannde
huunde hinyaaka, lirnyitaaka sakko goɗɗo nyaawee, maaɗum toonyaaɓe yoɓitee… Gila
Lansana Konte ƴetti laamu e hitaande 1984, kanko kadi o warii o toonyii
Ginenaaɓe heewɓe, fiikala (although) buy yejjitiino, walla yejinkinike. O lancii
cuuɗi e koɗanɗe teemeɗɗe Fulɓe e nder Konaakiri, o raɗike buy e leyɗeele mum’en,
tawa haa jooni huunde haalaaka… E lewru Korse (June), 2006, o imminiino
koninkooɓe makko, ɓe warii seppooɓe cappanɗe, hay huunde haalaaka fii ɗum ɗoo
kadi…Awa hay gooto nyaawaaka. Nde 22 Siilo (january), ndee ɗoo hitaande
fewndiinde, koninkooɓe Konte fellii warii hedde 230 fayɓe seppooɓe, haa jooni
bonnuɓe rewnaaka e laawol, tiindinee nunɗal… Taw si ɗum ɗoo fow accirte nih, jam
waaloo talloo?



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jara_Tarawore

Jara Tarawore ko 1935 jibinaa. Lenyol makko ko Manndinke. Ko o miniteeriijo
joginooɗo garaadu kolonel wano Lansana Konte mo o ƴettidi laamu ngun Gine
nyannde 3 ibriilu 1984 ɓaawo maayde Seeku Tuuree. Lansana Konte toɗɗaa hooreejo
mbatu miniteeriiɓe sincaangu fii laamagol leydi ndin, on tuma Jara toɗɗaa kanyum
mawɗo jaagorɓe (peremiye ministir). Neeɓaali fota kanko e Konte ɓe fuɗɗii
pooɗondirde laamu ngun, haasidi hakkunde leƴƴi ɗin fuɗɗii yaltitirde seeɗa
seeɗa. Nyannde 18 dujambar Konte itti darnde mawɗo jaagorɓe waɗti hoore mum
ardiiɗo ɗowgu (guwerneman) ngun, Jara lutti ka ɗowgu kono e darnde ɓurnde
hoyfude: jaagorɗo halfinaaɗo needi e jannde. Ɗum metti mo fota. Kanko e
miniteeriiɓe Manndinkooɓe ɓe etii liɓugol laamu ngun yuunuhu 1985, tawi Konte no
yahi e tummbondiral leyɗe CEDEAO/ECOWAS Lome, laamorde Togo. Ko ton o nani
kabaaru on. Liɓal laamu ngal fogi, e dow ballal sentere miniteeriiɓe daraniinde
Konte. Ɓayri on iwtii Lome, Jara e wondiɓɓe mum ɓen fow, ko ɓuri kon
Manndinkooɓe, nanngaa fellaa yuliyuhu 1985. Ko e nder ɗum kadi koohooɓe laamu
Seeku Tuuree ɗuuɗuɓe, kasanooɓe gila 3 ibriilu 1984, waraa, ɗum ko wano:
Ismaaʼiila Tuuree, Issaaqa Tuuree, Maamadii Keytaa, Muusaa Jakite ekn.



https://ff.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ginee

Gine (e Fulfulde Maasina, Lagine; e faransiire République de Guinée) ko leydi e
Afirik Hirnaangeeri. Hindi kernidi e leyɗe ɗee ɗoo: Sarliyon, Labiriyaa,
Koddiwaar, Maali, Senegal e Gine-Bisaawo. Noone laamu mayri ko ndenndaandi (ko
wi'etee kadi repibliiki). Hooreejo leydi ndin ko Lansana Konte innetee, Hooreejo
guwerneman maa Permiyee Ministir on laatii Lansana Kuyaate gila lewru fabraa'ilu
2007 (caggal murtital jamaa on) haa 20 maayuhu 2008. On tuma Persidan Lansana
Konte itti Kuyaate watti Ahmadu Tijjaani Suwaare.

Kapital ngal, e maanaa laamorde nden, ko Konaakiri, ca'e mawɗe go'o ko wano
Kinndiyaa, Maamun, Labe, Kankan, Zerekore ekn. Mbertudi ndin ko 250.158 km²,
jamaa on no yona miliyonji 11,5 (2014) haa sappo (anndaaka tigi tigi sabu ko
ɗuuɗi e ɓiɓɓe Gine ɓen dogii leydi mun ndin). Gine laatino kalfaandi Faransi
ittude 1898 (hitaande nanngegol Almaami Saamori Tuuree) haa nyannde 2 ottoombur
1958, nyalaande hettaare Gine nden. Hooreejo leydi arano on ko Ahmed Seeku
Tuuree (1922-1984). Ɗemngal laamu ngal ko faransi, ɗemɗe leƴƴi leydi ndin ko
Sooso, Pular, Maninka, Kisi, Tooma, Berse, Konyagi, Basari, Bajaranke, Baagaa,
Lanndumaa ekn. kono ko ɗemɗe tati arane ɗen ɓuretee haaleede. Gine hino tawaa e
kawtite leyɗe wano ONU, CEDEAO, UA.

Maanditaare (anniversary) fayɓe waranooɓe nyannde 22 Siilo ɓen ɓadtike. Taw si
woodii ko waylii gila Lansana Kuyaate toɗɗaa hooreejo jaagorɓe ɓaawo nde
teemeɗɗe fayɓe waraa, waɗtaa haako nyaayaako? Gila Gine heɓti jeytaare e
hitaande 1958, Seeku Tuuree laamii, Ginenaaɓe woowti toonyeede waree, tawa hay
huunde suusaa ŋaanyaade. Seeku Tuuree wari ko wari koo fow, ɓurɓe ɓee ko Fulɓe
toonyanoo waraa, gila annduɓe rewi e marɓe faa e kelɗuɓe buy o wari, haa hannde
huunde hinyaaka, lirnyitaaka sakko goɗɗo nyaawee, maaɗum toonyaaɓe yoɓitee… Gila
Lansana Konte ƴetti laamu e hitaande 1984, kanko kadi o warii o toonyii
Ginenaaɓe heewɓe, fiikala (although) buy yejjitiino, walla yejinkinike. O lancii
cuuɗi e koɗanɗe teemeɗɗe Fulɓe e nder Konaakiri, o raɗike buy e leyɗeele mum’en,
tawa haa jooni huunde haalaaka… E lewru Korse (June), 2006, o imminiino
koninkooɓe makko, ɓe warii seppooɓe cappanɗe, hay huunde haalaaka fii ɗum ɗoo
kadi…Awa hay gooto nyaawaaka. Nde 22 Siilo (january), ndee ɗoo hitaande
fewndiinde, koninkooɓe Konte fellii warii hedde 230 fayɓe seppooɓe, haa jooni
bonnuɓe rewnaaka e laawol, tiindinee nunɗal… Taw si ɗum ɗoo fow accirte nih, jam
waaloo talloo?



