https://ki.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia

Műndű űkwenda kwandika mathangű ma wikipedia nĩ eragwo karibű no űthome watho na
mĩtűgo mĩega ya kwandika wikipedia mĩega haha [[1]]

Mathangu ma wikipedia mathondekagwo na thiomi cia kũmaaka ciatagwo na githugu
Markup languages.

Wikipedia ya Githungu rũthiomi nĩyo wikipedia nene mũno ya wikipedia ciothe. ĩrĩ
na mathangũ ta mirioni ithatũ.

Wikipedia ya rũthiomi Yoruba rwaragio bururi wa Nigeria nĩyo wikipedia ya kerĩ
kwa unene ya thiomi cia kĩ Abirika.Nyarĩ na mathangũ 30,000.

Wikipedia ya rũthiomi rwa Githweri rwaragio bururi wa Kenya na Tanzania na
mabururi mangĩ nĩyo wikipedia ya gatatũ kwa ũnene ya thiomi cia kĩ Abirika.
Nyarĩ na mathangũ 24,000

Wikipedia cia na mathangű 10,000-19,999 Wikipedia ya rũthiomi rwa githweri
rwaragio bururi wa Kenya nĩyo wikipedia ya gatatũ kwa ũnene ya thiomi cia kĩ
Abirika. Nyarĩ na mathangũ 24,000

Wikipedia ya rũthiomi rwa Lingala rwaragio bururi wa Zaire.. Nyarĩ na mathangũ
1,900.

Wikipedia ya rũthiomi rwa Kinyarwanda rwaragio bururi wa Rwanda.. Nyarĩ na
mathangũ 1,800.

Wikipedia ya rũthiomi rwa Gigikuyu rwaragio bururi wa Kenya.. Nyarĩ na mathangũ
2,68.

Wikipedia ya rũthiomi rwa Kirundi rwaragio bururi wa Burundi.. Nyarĩ na mathangũ
1,80.

Wikipedia ya rũthiomi rwa Luganda rwaragio bururi wa Uganda.. Nyarĩ na mathangũ
1,60.



https://ki.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C4%A9g%C4%A9k%C5%A9y%C5%A9

Mũigana wa thiomi cia Abĩrika nĩ gĩcunjĩ kĩmwe gĩa ithatũ gĩa thiomi ciothe cia
thĩ. Imwe cia cio ciaragio mabũrũri-inĩ maingĩ nĩ andũ milioni nyingĩ no nĩ
iteanĩirio na igakomererio nĩ thiomi cia ageni kwambĩrĩria mĩaka ya 1900
kĩambĩrĩria-inĩ. Nĩ ũndũ rũthiomi nĩ ruo rũkuuaga mũtũũrĩre wa andũ mwanya,
thiomi ng’eni itingĩhota gũkuua mũtũũrĩre wa andũ a Abĩrika. Ũhũthĩri wa thiomi
ng’eni mathukuru-inĩ ũrutaga ciana kwaga kwĩyona ũrĩa kwagĩrĩire kana kwĩrora na
maitho ma ageni eene thiomi icio ng’eni cihũthĩraga.

Nĩ gũkoretwo na mĩcemanio mĩingĩ ya kwarĩrĩria ũkũria wa thiomi cia Afrika na
ũhũthĩri wa cio mathomo-inĩ, no maũndũ macio matirĩ mahinga. Thiomi cia Abĩrika
itirakũranĩra na thĩ hamwe na sayanisi ta ũrĩa ciagĩrĩirũo nĩ ũndũ arĩa athomu
kaingĩ matiandĩkaga maũgĩ mao na thiomi icio. Tondũ rũthiomi nĩ ikũmbĩ rĩa
kĩririkano kĩa mũingĩ (Thiong'o, 1986) na nĩ gũkoretwo na ũteanĩria na wonoria
wa ũgĩ kuma thiomi-inĩ cia Afrika hatarĩ gũciongerera ũgĩ mwerũ, mũicoi-nĩ
Abĩrika ĩtigĩtwo na makũmbĩ iberi, tũkĩaria ma kana na ngerekano. Na tondũ ũgĩ
ũrĩa woneka ndũcokagĩrĩra thiomi cia Abĩrika nĩ ũndũ nĩ iteanĩirio, gĩthomo kĩa
Abĩrika gĩtirĩ irĩ kana irĩĩri cia bata. Ĩndĩ, o na kwĩ na ikwĩro ta icio,
mũng’eng’ano wa gũkũria thiomi cia Afrika nĩ wambĩrĩirie na wĩra ũyũ wa bata no
mũhaka ũrĩke tondũ gũtirĩ mũndũ ũngĩhota kũgirĩrĩria rĩciria kahinda ka rĩo ge
gakinyu.

O na thiomi icio ikiaragio nĩ andũ aingĩ ũguo, ti cio ithomithanagia
mathukuruinĩ na o na itithomagwo mabũrũriinĩ maingĩ ma Abirika. Gĩtũmi kĩmwe gĩa
thiomi ici kwaga gũthomithania kana gũthomwo mathukuruinĩ ma Abirika nĩ
gũkomererio nĩ thiomi cia gĩkoronĩ kuma kĩambĩrĩria kĩa mĩaka ya 1900, na gĩtũmi
kĩngĩ nĩ gũteanĩrio nĩ thirikari cia Abirika kuma cianyita “wĩyathi” kwambĩrĩria
mũico wa mĩaka ya 1950. Nĩ guo tũmeye wega kĩrĩa gĩtũmaga thiomi cia Abirika
iteanĩrio ũguo, no mũhaka tũikie maitho harĩ hithitũrĩ ya thiomi cia Abirika
kuma hĩndĩ ya gĩkoronĩ.



https://ki.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kenya

Bururi wa Kenya wĩ thiinĩ ya Abĩrika ya mwena wa itherero. Mwena wa rũgũrũ kũrĩ
bũrũri wa Abyssinia (Ethiopia), mwena wa itherero kũrĩ Bũrũri wa Somalia, naguo
bũrũri wa Tanzania wĩ mwena wa mũhũro. Bũrũri wa Uganda wĩ mwena wa ithũiro na
Sũdana irĩ mwena wa igũrũ rĩa Uganda na nĩhakanĩte na bũrũri wa Kenya.

Irĩa inene rĩa kĩhindĩ (Indian Ocean) rĩrĩ mwena wa rĩũmiro rĩa rĩũa kĩanda ya
Somalia.

Bũrũri wa Kenya ni waheirwo wĩathi mwaka wa ngirĩ imwe magana kenda mĩrongo
ĩtandatũ na ithatũ (1963) kũma thrikari ya mũthũngũ (Britain). Mũthee Jomo
Kenyatta nĩacokire akĩoya gĩti gĩa ũtongoria harĩa aikarire nginya mwaka wa
ngirĩ imwe magana kenda mĩrongo mũgwanja na inyanya (1978). Unangĩkorwo
nĩtwagĩire wĩathi Kenya no yathire na mbere na kwĩonera mathĩna maingĩ mũno
makaria kũma kĩama kĩa ũtongoria nĩkio KANU. Nĩ kwarĩ na wakinai mũgagachũ
kũmania na kũragwo kwa Pĩo Gama Pinto na J. M Kariũki moragani macio ni ma
tũikaga marĩ ma gĩthiatha (political).



https://ki.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metha_Njokereri

Metha cĩa mathabu na thayathi ĩkoragűo na miena ĩrĩ ĩria ĩcenjagia: mĩhari na
koramu. Harĩa műhari na koramu cicamanagĩria getagwo gathadűkű na nĩko
kandikagwo űhoro. Metha Njokereri ĩbanga ĩyamű na miena ĩrĩ ĩria ĩcenjagia:
namba cia gĩthiűrűkĩro na namba cia erektroni ĩria cia gĩthiűrűkĩro kia nja.

Metha Njokereri ya thondekirűo nĩ andű angi űmwe wao nĩ Medeelev. Îthangű
rĩtarĩrie na gĩthűngu na njira hűthű ria rurenda nĩ
http://www.bpc.edu/mathscience/chemistry/history_of_the_periodic_table.html#fath
ers_of_the_periodic_table

Marĩtwa maingĩ ma ma Gĩthűgű cuma marigagia na ium. Maritwa maria mantarikitie
na ium nĩ maria mameyekanire tene mbere ya metha ya Gĩthűgű gűthondekwo. Maritwa
manini marigitie na ium na ticuma nita Helium. Kĩhumo kĩa maritwa ma Metha
Njokereri ni mĩtungo ya iyamu, maritwa ma andu, minűrű na itumi ingĩ Gikaro giki
kihaha iguru kina maritwa ma thiomi ingĩ na mundu ni kuorota na koroti ga kabia
nigethe wone ritwa.

Ũhoro wa metha ya Jabaanisi no umĩthome na Gĩthűgű
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chemical elements in East Asian languages#Japanese

Metha Njokereri ya kĩ Chaina Ũhoro wa metha ya kĩ Chaina no umĩthome na Gĩthűgű
[1]

Metha Njokereri ya kĩ Korea Ũhoro wa metha ya kĩ Chaina no ũmĩthome na Gĩthűngű
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chemical elements in East Asian languages#Korean

Metha Njokereri ya Portugese Ũhoro wa metha ya kĩ Chaina no ũmĩthome na
Portugese [3]

Metha Njokereri ya thiomi cia Kiabĩrika Kwĩ gakũndi metha Njokeri thondeka cia
thiomi cia Kiabĩrika ĩrĩkĩtie gũthondekwo kana irathondekwo. No wone metha ici
rũrendainĩ haha [8]. Kwĩ thiomi makĩria ya ngiri igĩrĩ cia Kĩabĩrika [4] na
metha iria cia rurendaini ĩtikinyite mĩrongoĩri.



https://ki.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usain_Bolt

Usain St. Leo Bolt (aciarĩtwo mweri 21, mweri wa August mwaka wa 1986) ni
muteng'eri wa mahenya makuhĩ wa kuuma bururi wa Jamaica. Bolt nĩwe muhotani wa
mahenya ma mita 100, mita 200 na mita 100 relay mathako-inĩ ma Olympics na ma
IAAF World Athletics Championships. Ahootanire ihenya rĩrĩ rĩa relay hamwe na
ateng'eri angĩ a Jamaica (Steve Mullings, Michael Frater na Asafa Powell). Niwe
muteng'eri urĩa unyitĩrĩire rekondi cia mahenya ma mita 100 na 200, na ihinda
rĩa sekondi 9.58 (mita 100) na sekondi 19.19 (mita 200). Aigire rekondi ici
mahenya-ini ma IAAF World Athletics Championships mucii-ini munene wa Berlin,
bururi-inĩ wa Germany, mweri uyu. Nowe unyitĩrĩire rekondi cia Olympics cia
mahenya ma mita 100 (sekondi 9.69) na mita 200 (sekondi 19.30), iria aigire
mathako-inĩ ma Summer Olympics mweri wa August mwaka wa 2008, muciĩ-inĩ munene
wa Beijing, bururi-inĩ wa China. Hamwe na ateng'eri angĩ a kwao (Nesta Carter,
Michael Frater na Asafa Powell), nĩahootire ihenya ria mita 100 relay na akĩiga
rekondi ya sekondi 37.10, mathako-inĩ o macio.

Atanagĩa uhotani uyu na rekondi ici, Bolt nĩarĩkĩtie kuonania uhoti wake
mahenya-inĩ na kugĩa thahabu ya mita 200 mathako-inĩ ma World Junior
Championships mwaka-inĩ wa 2002, na rĩngĩ mwaka-inĩ wa 2003 mathako-inĩ o macio.
Mwaka-inĩ wa 2004, hĩndĩ ya mathako ma CARIFTA bururĩ-inĩ wa Bermuda, Bolt nĩ
atuĩkire muteng´eri wa mbere wa mĩaka mĩnini guteng´era ihenya ma mita 200 na
ihinda rĩa thĩ ya sekondi 20. Ahootire rekondi ya Roy Martin na akĩiga yake ya
sekondi 19.93. Kuuma hĩndĩ ĩo nĩ athiĩte na mbere gukorwo arĩ muteng'eri njorua.
Mwaka wa 2007 nĩ atuĩkire wa kerĩ mahenya-inĩ ma mita 200 na 100 relay
mathako-inĩ ma IAAF World Athletics Championships muciĩ-inĩ munene wa Osaka,
bururi wa Japan.



https://ki.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia%3aCommunity_Portal

Hallo, my name is Anastasiya Lvova, I'm "duty" in Connectivity project. The
essence of the "Connectivity" project is to study and enhance the coherence of
Wikipedia, or, in other words, to improve hypertext navigation between articles.
The project deals with deadends, isolated articles, non-categorized articles,
transitivity of the category tree, etc.

We want to work with your language version, but we need configured
MediaWiki:Disambiguationspage for it (with direct links to template namespace
pages, for example,
ru:MediaWiki:Disambiguationspage/de:MediaWiki:Disambiguationspage/fr:MediaWiki:D
isambiguationspage). Is it possible to set it up for our usage?

Please give a bot bit to SieBot, so it will not flood your RC as it adds
interwiki links using pywikipedia's interwiki.py. SieBot is active on 200
Wikipedias. See the user page of the bot for more details, or check a complete
overview of its activities here. Cheers! Siebrand (talk) Siebrand 16:23, 18
August 2007 (UTC)

Hello! I ask for permission to run my interwiki bot PipepBot here, and to get a
bot flag for it.

Dear all, this is to request a bot flag for Synthebot. Its technical information
is summarized below.

Further technical information is available on its main page. Thank you in
advance. Regards, --Julian 18:14, 10 December 2008 (UTC)

Mbarĩ ya mũmbi mwĩ na kũ? Rĩu rĩĩ tũrĩ kuo! noo ona tũrĩ kuo rĩĩ, nĩtũriganĩirũo
nĩ rũthiomi ruitũ. Ona digichanarĩ tũtirĩ ya rũthiomi, ona kana mĩarĩrie ya
muthemba o muthemba (ta ngiraama), ta urĩa nguona wikipenda ha rũthiomi rwa
isiZulu kana IsiXhosa. ũkĩraai mwadĩke maũndũ ma rũthiomi rwa gĩkũyũ, andũ arĩa
moi, arĩa makinyĩtie mĩaka mĩrongo mũgwanja na gũthiĩ na igũrũ matanathira.Ngai
ithe wa Jesũ christũ amũrathime na amũtũrie wega. --213.150.99.226 06:26, 10
November 2005 (UTC)

Dear community. I am writing to you to promote a special wiki called Betawiki.
This wiki facilitates the localisation (l10n) of the MediaWiki interface. You
may have changed many messages here to use your language in the interface, but
if you would log in to for example the English language Wiktionary, you would
not be able to use the interface as well translated as here. Infact, of the 1798
messages in the core of MediaWiki, 0 messages have been translated. Betawiki
also supports the translation of messages of almost 80 extensions, with about
1050 messages.

If you wish to contribute to better support of your language in MediaWiki, as
well as for many MediaWiki extensions, please visit Betawiki, create an account
and request translator priviledges. You can see the current status of
localisation of your language on meta and do not forget to get in touch with
others that may already be working on your language on Betawiki.

If you have any further questions, please let me know on my talk page on
Betawiki. We will try and assist you as much as possible, for example by
importing all messages from a local wiki for you to start with, if you so
desire.

You can also find us on the Freenode IRC network in the channel #mediawiki-i18n
where we would be happy to help you get started.

Thank you very much for your attention and I do hope to see some of you on
Betawiki soon! Cheers! Siebrand@Betawiki 17:19, 7 October 2007 (UTC)

Hello. To facilitate steward granting of bot access, I suggest implementing the
standard bot policy on this wiki. In particular, this policy allows stewards to
automatically flag known interlanguage linking bots (if this page says that is
acceptable), which form the vast majority of such requests. The policy also
enables global bots on this wiki (if this page says that is acceptable), which
are trusted bots that will be given bot access on every wiki that allows global
bots.

This policy makes bot access requesting much easier for local users, operators,
and stewards. To implement it we only need to create a redirect to this page
from Project:Bot policy, and add a line at the top noting that it is used here.
Please read the text at m:Bot policy before commenting. If you object, please
say so; I hope to implement in one week if there is no objection, since it is
particularly written to streamline bot requests on wikis with little or no
community interested in bot access requests. Luckas Blade 14:46, 1 March 2009
(UTC)

Hello! I am a Polish wikipedian and I would like to ask you for your help -
writing a new article about former Polish President who won the Nobel Peace
Prize in 1983 – Lech Wałęsa. I have looked for his biography in your Wikipedia
but without success. Polish Wikipedians will be grateful for your help. Thank
you so much in advance! PS you can find the English version of the article here.
Best wishes from Poland, Patrol110 20:46, 3 October 2009 (UTC)

The call for applications for Wikimania Scholarships to attend Wikimania 2010 in
Gdansk, Poland (July 9-11) is now open. The Wikimedia Foundation offers
Scholarships to pay for selected individuals' round trip travel, accommodations,
and registration at the conference. To apply, visit the Wikimania 2010
scholarships information page, click the secure link available there, and fill
out the form to apply. For additional information, please visit the Scholarships
information and FAQ pages:

The Wikimedia Foundation recently updated the official Wikipedia globe. We
realize that a lot of projects have never had a localized logo in their native
language, so we are making sure that we create logos for every Wikipedia project
that we have. The only issue is: we can't figure out what should be on your
localized logo. :-)

Please put the translation on my Meta talk page. Thank you! Cbrown1023
discussion 00:51, 25 May 2010 (UTC)

Hello Wikipedians, I am Theo and I am working for the Wikimedia Foundation
during the 2010 Fundraiser. My job is to be the liaison between your community
and the Foundation. This year's fundraiser is intended to be a collaborative and
global effort; we recognize that banner messages which may perform well in the
United States don't necessarily translate well, or appeal to international
audiences.

I'm contacting you as I am currently looking for translators who are willing to
contribute to this project by helping translate and localize messages into
different languages and suggesting messages that would appeal to your readers on
the Fundraising Meta Page. We've started the setup on meta for both banner
submission, statistical analysis, and grouping volunteers together. Use the talk
pages on meta, talk to your local communities, talk to others, talk to us, and
add your feedback to the proposed messages as well! I look forward to working
with you during this year's fundraiser. If someone could translate this message
I would really appreciate it so that everyone is able to understand our goals
and contribute to this year's campaign. Theo (WMF) 20:45, 20 October 2010 (UTC)

Hello, I'm Rotsee at Swedish Wikipedia, and I'm currently writing on a blog post
about vocabulary domains in languages seldom used in academic or official
contexts. I am curious to know if there are any interesting discussions going on
at this Wikipedia around for instance what words to use for foreign concepts?
Any article discussions that might be interesting to follow? Best regards, Leo
Wallentin

Dear friends, may I ask you to add a hyperlink to our Tatar Wikipedia
(http://tt.wikipedia.org) to yourr Front page. Tatars - are turkic nation living
in Tatarstan Republic, second biggest nation in Russian Federation. hope to hear
from you soon. sincerely yours, Muhtac 21:42, 20 March 2011 (UTC)

Further details and educational materials will be available shortly. The
referendum is scheduled for 12-27 August, 2011, and will be conducted on servers
hosted by a neutral third party. Referendum details, officials, voting
requirements, and supporting materials will be posted at Meta:Image filter
referendum shortly.

Sorry for delivering you a message in English. Please help translate the pages
on the referendum on Meta and join the translators mailing list.

For the coordinating committee, Philippe (WMF) Cbrown1023 Risker Mardetanha
PeterSymonds Robert Harris

I humbly request bot status on this wiki in order to maintain Interwiki. Thank
you --Hedwig in Washington 12:51, 24 October 2011 (UTC)

I apologize that you are receiving this message in English. Please help
translate it.

The Wikimedia Foundation is discussing changes to its Terms of Use. The
discussion can be found at Talk:Terms of use. Everyone is invited to join in.
Because the new version of Terms of use is not in final form, we are not able to
present official translations of it. Volunteers are welcome to translate it, as
German volunteers have done at m:Terms of use/de, but we ask that you note at
the top that the translation is unofficial and may become outdated as the
English version is changed. The translation request can be found at
m:Translation requests/WMF/Terms of Use 2 -- Maggie Dennis, Community Liaison
00:58, 27 October 2011 (UTC)

I apologize that you are receiving this message in English. Please help
translate it.

The Wikimedia Foundation is seeking Community Fellows and project ideas for the
Community Fellowship Program. A Fellowship is a temporary position at the
Wikimedia Foundation in order to work on a specific project or set of projects.
Submissions for 2012 are encouraged to focus on the theme of improving editor
retention and increasing participation in Wikimedia projects. If interested,
please submit a project idea or apply to be a fellow by January 15, 2012. Please
visit https://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Wikimedia_Fellowships for more
information.

--Siko Bouterse, Head of Community Fellowships, Wikimedia Foundation 13:07, 21
December 2011 (UTC)

Wikimedia Foundation is getting ready to push out 1.19 to all the WMF-hosted
wikis. As we finish wrapping up our code review, you can test the new version
right now on beta.wmflabs.org. For more information, please read the release
notes or the start of the final announcement.

Report any problems on the labs beta wiki and we'll work to address them before
they software is released to the production wikis.

Note that this cluster does have SUL but it is not integrated with SUL in
production, so you'll need to create another account. You should avoid using the
same password as you use here. — Global message delivery 16:18, 15 January 2012
(UTC)

(Apologies if this message isn't in your language.) The Wikimedia Foundation is
planning to upgrade MediaWiki (the software powering this wiki) to its latest
version this month. You can help to test it before it is enabled, to avoid
disruption and breakage. More information is available in the full announcement.
Thank you for your understanding.

Guillaume Paumier, via the Global message delivery system (wrong page? You can
fix it.). 15:07, 12 February 2012 (UTC)

As a global sysop, I can help deleting these pages. I will wait for two weeks
and if no one has objected by then, I will carry out this proposal.

Please note that I do this to help your project and that every deletion can
easily be undone. Feel free to leave me a message on my talk page.

(Apologies if this message isn't in your language. Please consider translating
it, as well as the full version of this announcement on Meta)

The Wikimedia Foundation is planning to do limited testing of IPv6 on June 2-3.
If there are not too many problems, we may fully enable IPv6 on World IPv6 day
(June 6), and keep it enabled.

Read the full version of this announcement on how to test the behavior of IPv6
with various tools and how to leave bug reports, and to find a fuller analysis
of the implications of the IPv6 migration.

--Erik Möller, VP of Engineering and Product Development, Wikimedia Foundation
01:07, 2 June 2012 (UTC)

Wikimedia Commons is happy to announce that the 2011 Picture of the Year
competition is now open. We are interested in your opinion as to which images
qualify to be the Picture of the Year 2011. Any user registered at Commons or a
Wikimedia wiki SUL-related to Commons with more than 75 edits before 1 April
2012 (UTC) is welcome to vote and, of course everyone is welcome to view!

About 600 of the best of Wikimedia Common's photos, animations, movies and
graphics were chosen –by the international Wikimedia Commons community– out of
12 million files during 2011 and are now called Featured Pictures.

From professional animal and plant shots to breathtaking panoramas and skylines,
restorations of historically relevant images, images portraying the world's best
architecture, maps, emblems, diagrams created with the most modern technology,
and impressive human portraits, Commons Features Pictures of all flavors.

See you on Commons! --Picture of the Year 2011 Committee 18:25, 5 June 2012
(UTC)

(Apologies if this message isn't in your language. Please consider translating
it)

As many of you are aware, the Wikimedia Board of Trustees recently initiated
important changes in the way that money is being distributed within the
Wikimedia movement. As part of this, a new community-led "Funds Dissemination
Committee" (FDC) is currently being set up. Already in 2012-13, its
recommendations will guide the decisions about the distribution of over 10
million US dollars among the Foundation, chapters and other eligible entities.

Now, seven capable, knowledgeable and trustworthy community members are sought
to volunteer on the initial Funds Dissemination Committee. It is expected to
take up its work in September. In addition, a community member is sought to be
the Ombudsperson for the FDC process. If you are interested in joining the
committee, read the call for volunteers. Nominations are planned to close on
August 15.

--Anasuya Sengupta, Director of Global Learning and Grantmaking, Wikimedia
Foundation 20:11, 19 July 2012 (UTC)

You might also be interested in the idea to create a central Wikipedia Library
where approved editors would have access to all participating resource donors.
Add your feedback to the Community Fellowship proposal. Apologies for the
English message (translate here). Go sign up :) --Ocaasi (talk) 02:17, 16 August
2012 (UTC)

I apologize for addressing you in English. I would be grateful if you could
translate this message into your language.

The Wikimedia Foundation is conducting a request for comment on a proposed
program that could provide legal assistance to users in specific support roles
who are named in a legal complaint as a defendant because of those roles. We
wanted to be sure that your community was aware of this discussion and would
have a chance to participate in that discussion.

If this page is not the best place to publicize this request for comment, please
help spread the word to those who may be interested in participating. (If you'd
like to help translating the "request for comment", program policy or other
pages into your language and don't know how the translation system works, please
come by my user talk page at m:User talk:Mdennis (WMF). I'll be happy to assist
or to connect you with a volunteer who can assist.)

As some of you might already have heard Wikimedia Deutschland is working on a
new Wikimedia project. It is called m:Wikidata. The goal of Wikidata is to
become a central data repository for the Wikipedias, its sister projects and the
world. In the future it will hold data like the number of inhabitants of a
country, the date of birth of a famous person or the length of a river. These
can then be used in all Wikimedia projects and outside of them.

It'd be great if you could join us, test the demo version, provide feedback and
take part in the development of Wikidata. You can find all the relevant
information including an FAQ and sign-up links for our on-wiki newsletter on the
Wikidata page on Meta.

For further discussions please use this talk page (if you are uncomfortable
writing in English you can also write in your native language there) or point me
to the place where your discussion is happening so I can answer there.

The only pre-requisite is for the volunteer to actually live in the country and
to have access to at least one donation method that we offer for that country
(mainly credit/debit card, but also real-time banking like IDEAL, E-wallets,
etc...) so we can do a live test and see if the donation goes through. All
volunteers will be reimbursed of the donations that eventually succeed (and they
will be low amounts, like 1-2 dollars)

(Apologies if this message isn't in your language.) Next week, the Wikimedia
Foundation will transition its main technical operations to a new data center in
Ashburn, Virginia, USA. This is intended to improve the technical performance
and reliability of all Wikimedia sites, including this wiki. There will be some
times when the site will be in read-only mode, and there may be full outages;
the current target windows for the migration are January 22nd, 23rd and 24th,
2013, from 17:00 to 01:00 UTC (see other timezones on timeanddate.com). More
information is available in the full announcement.

If you would like to stay informed of future technical upgrades, consider
becoming a Tech ambassador and joining the ambassadors mailing list. You will be
able to help your fellow Wikimedians have a voice in technical discussions and
be notified of important decisions.

Guillaume Paumier, via the Global message delivery system (wrong page? You can
fix it.). 15:26, 19 January 2013 (UTC)

Wikidata has been in development for a few months now. It is now time for the
roll-out of the first part of it on your Wikipedia. Phase 1 is the support for
the management of language links. It is already being used on the Hungarian,
Hebrew, Italian and English Wikipedias. The next step is to enable the extension
on all other Wikipedias. We have currently planned this for March 6.

Editors on en:wp have created a great page with all the necessary information
for editors and there is also an FAQ for this deployment. Please ask questions
you might have on the FAQ’s discussion page.

To stay up-to-date on everything happening around Wikidata please subscribe to
the newsletter that is delivered weekly to subscribed user’s talk pages. You can
see previous editions here.

Sorry for writing in English. I hope someone can translate this locally. If you
understand German better than English you can have a look at the announcement on
de:Wikipedia:Kurier.

As I annonced 2 weeks ago, Wikidata phase 1 (language links) has been deployed
here today. Language links in the sidebar are coming from Wikidata in addition
to the ones in the wiki text. To edit them, scroll to the bottom of the language
links, and click edit. You no longer need to maintain these links by hand in the
wiki text of the article.

Where can I find more information and ask questions? Editors on en:wp have
created a great page with all the necessary information for editors and there is
also an FAQ for this deployment. It'd be great if you could bring this to this
wiki if that has not already happened. Please ask questions you might have on
the FAQ’s discussion page.

I want to be kept up to date about Wikidata To stay up-to-date on everything
happening around Wikidata please subscribe to the newsletter that is delivered
weekly to subscribed user’s talk pages.

(Please consider translating this message for the benefit of your fellow
Wikimedians)

Greetings. As you might have seen on the Wikimedia tech blog or the tech
ambassadors list, a new functionality called "Lua" is being enabled on all
Wikimedia sites today. Lua is a scripting language that enables you to write
faster and more powerful MediaWiki templates.

If you have questions about how to convert existing templates to Lua (or how to
create new ones), we'll be holding two support sessions on IRC next week: one on
Wednesday (for Oceania, Asia & America) and one on Friday (for Europe, Africa &
America); see m:IRC office hours for the details. If you can't make it, you can
also get help at mw:Talk:Lua scripting.

If you'd like to learn about this kind of events earlier in advance, consider
becoming a Tech ambassador by subscribing to the mailing list. You will also be
able to help your fellow Wikimedians have a voice in technical discussions and
be notified of important decisions.

Guillaume Paumier, via the Global message delivery system. 20:03, 13 March 2013
(UTC) (wrong page? You can fix it.)

Sorry for writing in English. I hope someone can translate this. If you
understand German better than English you can have a look at the announcement on
de:Wikipedia:Kurier.

A while ago the first phase of Wikidata was enabled on this Wikipedia. This
means you are getting the language links in each article from Wikidata. It is
soon time to enable the second phase of Wikidata (infoboxes) here. We have
already done this on the [first 11 Wikipedias] (it, he, hu, ru, tr, uk, uz, hr,
bs, sr, sh) and things are looking good. The next step is English Wikipedia.
This is planned for April 8. If everything works out fine we will deploy on all
remaining Wikipedias on April 10. I will update this part of the FAQ if there
are any issues forcing us to change this date. I will also sent another note to
this village pump once the deployment is finished.

What will happen once we have phase 2 enabled here? Once it is enabled in a few
days you will be able to make use of the structured data that is available on
Wikidata in your articles/infoboxes. It includes things like the symbol for a
chemical element, the ISBN for a book or the top level domain of a country.
(None of this will happen automatically. Someone will have to change the article
or infobox template for this to happen!)

We are working on expanding the parser function so you can for example use
{{#property:chief executive officer}} instead of {{#property:p169}}. The
complete plan for this is here.

Where can I find more information and ask questions? We have collected the main
questions in an FAQ for this deployment. Please ask questions you might have on
the FAQ’s discussion page.

I want to be kept up to date about Wikidata To stay up-to-date on everything
happening around Wikidata please subscribe to the newsletter that is delivered
weekly to subscribed user’s talk pages.

(Please consider translating this message for the benefit of your fellow
Wikimedians. Please also consider translating the proposal.)

Read this message in English / Lleer esti mensaxe n'asturianu / বাংলায় এই
বার্তাটি পড়ুন / Llegiu aquest missatge en català / Læs denne besked på dansk /
Lies diese Nachricht auf Deutsch / Leś cal mesag' chè in Emiliàn / Leer este
mensaje en español / Lue tämä viesti suomeksi / Lire ce message en français /
Ler esta mensaxe en galego / हिन्दी / Pročitajte ovu poruku na hrvatskom / Baca
pesan ini dalam Bahasa Indonesia / Leggi questo messaggio in italiano / ಈ
ಸಂದೇಶವನ್ನು ಕನ್ನಡದಲ್ಲಿ ಓದಿ / Aqra dan il-messaġġ bil-Malti / norsk (bokmål) /
Lees dit bericht in het Nederlands / Przeczytaj tę wiadomość po polsku / Citiți
acest mesaj în română / Прочитать это сообщение на русском / Farriintaan ku aqri
Af-Soomaali / Pročitaj ovu poruku na srpskom (Прочитај ову поруку на српском) /
อ่านข้อความนี้ในภาษาไทย / Прочитати це повідомлення українською мовою / Đọc
thông báo bằng tiếng Việt / 使用中文阅读本信息。

There is a new request for comment on Meta-Wiki concerning the removal of
administrative rights from long-term inactive Wikimedians. Generally, this
proposal from stewards would apply to wikis without an administrators' review
process.

We are also compiling a list of projects with procedures for removing inactive
administrators on the talk page of the request for comment. Feel free to add
your project(s) to the list if you have a policy on administrator inactivity.

Thanks, Billinghurst (thanks to all the translators!) 04:54, 24 April 2013 (UTC)

Sorry for writing in English. I hope someone can translate this. If you
understand German better than English you can have a look at the announcement on
de:Wikipedia:Kurier.

A while ago the first phase of Wikidata was enabled on this Wikipedia. This
means you are getting the language links in each article from Wikidata. We have
now enabled the second phase of Wikidata (infoboxes) here. We have already done
this on the [first 11 Wikipedias] (it, he, hu, ru, tr, uk, uz, hr, bs, sr, sh) a
month ago and two days ago on the English Wikipedia. Today all the remaining
Wikipedias followed.

What does having phase 2 enabled here mean? You are now able to make use of the
structured data that is available on Wikidata in your articles/infoboxes. It
includes things like the symbol for a chemical element, the ISBN for a book or
the top level domain of a country. (None of this will happen automatically.
Someone will have to change the article or infobox template for this to happen!)
The current state is just the beginning though. It will be extended based on
feedback we get from you now.

We are working on expanding the parser function so you can for example use
{{#property:headquarter location}} instead of {{#property:p159}}. The complete
plan for this is here.

Where can I test this? You can test it on test2 if you don't want to do it in an
article here.

Where can I find more information and ask questions? We have collected the main
questions in an FAQ for this deployment. Please ask questions you might have on
the FAQ’s discussion page.

I want to be kept up to date about Wikidata To stay up-to-date on everything
happening around Wikidata please subscribe to the newsletter that is delivered
weekly to subscribed user’s talk pages.

We are excited about taking yet another step towards allowing all Wikipedias
share structured data and collect and curate it together. --Lydia Pintscher
19:11, 24 April 2013 (UTC)

Hi, apologies for posting this in English, but I wanted to alert your community
to a discussion on Meta about potential changes to the Wikimedia Trademark
Policy. Please translate this statement if you can. We hope that you will all
participate in the discussion; we also welcome translations of the legal team’s
statement into as many languages as possible and encourage you to voice your
thoughts there. Please see the Trademark practices discussion (on Meta-Wiki) for
more information. Thank you! --Mdennis (WMF) (talk)

The Wikipedia Library gets Wikipedia editors free access to reliable sources
that are behind paywalls. I want to alert you to our latest donation.

My apologies for the incorrect link: You can sign up for Cochrane Collaboration
accounts at the COCHRANE sign-up page. Cheers, Ocaasi 21:43, 16 June 2013 (UTC)

Hello, Sorry for English but It's very important for bot operators so I hope
someone translates this. Pywikipedia is migrating to Git so after July 26, SVN
checkouts won't be updated If you're using Pywikipedia you have to switch to
git, otherwise you will use out-dated framework and your bot might not work
properly. There is a manual for doing that and a blog post explaining about this
change in non-technical language. If you have question feel free to ask in
mw:Manual talk:Pywikipediabot/Gerrit, mailing list, or in the IRC channel. Best
Amir (via Global message delivery). 13:25, 23 July 2013 (UTC)

The Wikimedia Foundation will soon turn on VisualEditor for all users, all the
time on your Wikipedia. Right now your Wikipedia does not have any local
documents on VisualEditor, and we hope that your community can change that. To
find out about how you can help with translations visit the TranslationCentral
for VisualEditor and read the easy instructions on bringing information to your
Wikipedia. The User Guide and the FAQ are very important to have in your
language.

We want to find out as much as we can from you about VisualEditor and how it
helps your Wikipedia, and having local pages is a great way to start. We also
encourage you to leave feedback on Mediawiki where the community can offer
ideas, opinions, and point out bugs that may still exist in the software that
need to be reported to Bugzilla. If you are able to speak for the concerns of
others in English on MediaWiki or locally I encourage you to help your community
to be represented in this process.

If you can help translate the user interface for VisualEditor to your language,
you can help with that as well. Translatewiki has open tasks for translating
VisualEditor. A direct link to translate the user interface is here. You can see
how we are doing with those translations here. You need an account on
Translatewiki to translate. This account is free and easy to create.

If we can help your community in any way with this process, please let me know
and I will do my best to assist your Wikipedia with this |exciting development.
You can contact me on my meta talk page or by email. You can also contact
Patrick Earley for help with translations and documents on Mediawiki. We look
forward to working with you to bring the VisualEditor experience to your
Wikipedia! Keegan (WMF) (talk) 19:05, 30 July 2013 (UTC)

Greetings. Starting on August 21 (tomorrow), all users with an account will be
using HTTPS to access Wikimedia sites. HTTPS brings better security and improves
your privacy. More information is available at m:HTTPS.

If HTTPS causes problems for you, tell us on bugzilla, on IRC (in the
#wikimedia-operations channel) or on meta. If you can't use the other methods,
you can also send an e-mail to https@wikimedia.org.

Greg Grossmeier (via the Global message delivery system). 19:18, 20 August 2013
(UTC) (wrong page? You can fix it.)

Notifications will inform users about new activity that affects them on this
wiki in a unified way: for example, this new tool will let you know when you
have new talk page messages, edit reverts, mentions or links -- and is designed
to augment (rather than replace) the watchlist. The Wikimedia Foundation's
editor engagement team developed this tool (code-named 'Echo') earlier this
year, to help users contribute more productively to MediaWiki projects.

We're now getting ready to bring Notifications to almost all other Wikimedia
sites, and are aiming for a 22 October deployment, as outlined in this release
plan. It is important that notifications is translated for all of the languages
we serve.

Please let us know if you have any questions, suggestions or comments about this
new tool. For more information, visit this project hub and this help page.
Keegan (WMF) (talk) 18:49, 4 October 2013 (UTC)

I apologize for this message being only in English. Please translate it if
needed to help your community.

The Wikimedia Foundation's multimedia team seeks community guidance on a
proposal to support the MP4 video format. This digital video standard is used
widely around the world to record, edit and watch videos on mobile phones,
desktop computers and home video devices. It is also known as H.264/MPEG-4 or
AVC.

You are also welcome to join tomorrow's Office hours chat on IRC, this Thursday,
January 16, at 19:00 UTC, if you would like to discuss this project with our
team and other community members.

We look forward to a constructive discussion with you, so we can make a more
informed decision together on this important topic. Keegan (WMF) (talk) 06:47,
16 January 2014 (UTC)

The Catalan-speaking world... Want to find out more? From March 16 to April 15
we will organise the Catalan Culture Challenge, a Wikipedia editing contest in
which victory will go to those who start and improve the greatest number of
articles about 50 key figures of Catalan culture. You can take part by creating
or expanding articles on these people in your native language (or any other one
you speak). It would be lovely to have you on board. :-)

There is a current discussion on German Wikipedia on a decision of Asaf Bartov,
Head of WMF Grants and Global South Partnerships, Wikimedia Foundation, who
rejected a request for funding a proposal from wikipedians from eowiki one year
ago with the explanation the existence, cultivation, and growth of the Esperanto
Wikipedia does not advance our educational mission. No one needs free knowledge
in Esperanto. On meta there has also started a discussion about that decision.
--Holder (talk) 10:07, 5 May 2014 (UTC)

Hello and sorry for writing in English. Can anyone help me translate a small
article (2 paragraphs) from English to your language and create the article in
your wiki? Please, fell free to answer in my talk page in your wiki anytime.
Thanks! Xaris333 (talk) 00:12, 13 August 2014 (UTC)

Greetings! The Individual Engagement Grants program is accepting proposals for
funding new experiments from September 1st to 30th. Your idea could improve
Wikimedia projects with a new tool or gadget, a better process to support
community-building on your wiki, research on an important issue, or something
else we haven't thought of yet. Whether you need $200 or $30,000 USD, Individual
Engagement Grants can cover your own project development time in addition to
hiring others to help you.

Wikimedia España invites you to join the Monuments of Spain Challenge. And
what’s that? It’s a contest. You have to edit, translate or expand articles
about the Spanish monuments and you will be granted points. So you’re not just
writing about wonderful buildings: you can get prizes!

The time of the contest will include all October and any information you may
need is right here.

Hello, Dear wikipedians. I invite you to edit and improve this article and to
add information about your and other country.--Kaiyr (talk) 11:48, 31 October
2014 (UTC)

(Sorry for the English - please translate this message!) MediaWiki message
delivery (talk) 20:01, 4 March 2015 (UTC)

Hello, I made a proposal on Meta to change the rules for the steward
confirmations. Currently consensus to remove is required for a steward to lose
his status, however I think it's fairer to the community if every steward needed
the consensus to keep. As this is an issue that affects all WMF wikis, I'm
sending this notification to let people know & be able to participate. Best
regards, --MF-W 16:12, 10 April 2015 (UTC)

This is a message from the 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee.
Translations are available.

I am pleased to announce that nominations are now being accepted for the 2015
Wikimedia Foundation Elections. This year the Board and the FDC Staff are
looking for a diverse set of candidates from regions and projects that are
traditionally under-represented on the board and in the movement as well as
candidates with experience in technology, product or finance. To this end they
have published letters describing what they think is needed and, recognizing
that those who know the community the best are the community themselves, the
election committee is accepting nominations for community members you think
should run and will reach out to those nominated to provide them with
information about the job and the election process.

Board of Trustees The Board of Trustees is the decision-making body that is
ultimately responsible for the long term sustainability of the Foundation, so we
value wide input into its selection. There are three positions being filled.
More information about this role can be found at the board elections page.

Funds Dissemination Committee (FDC) The Funds Dissemination Committee (FDC)
makes recommendations about how to allocate Wikimedia movement funds to eligible
entities. There are five positions being filled. More information about this
role can be found at the FDC elections page.

Funds Dissemination Committee (FDC) Ombud The FDC Ombud receives complaints and
feedback about the FDC process, investigates complaints at the request of the
Board of Trustees, and summarizes the investigations and feedback for the Board
of Trustees on an annual basis. One position is being filled. More information
about this role can be found at the FDC Ombudsperson elections page.

The candidacy submission phase lasts from 00:00 UTC April 20 to 23:59 UTC May 5
for the Board and from 00:00 UTCApril 20 to 23:59 UTC April 30 for the FDC and
FDC Ombudsperson. This year, we are accepting both self-nominations and
nominations of others. More information on this election and the nomination
process can be found on the 2015 Wikimedia elections page on Meta-Wiki.

On behalf of the Elections Committee, -Gregory Varnum (User:Varnent)
Coordinator, 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee

Posted by the MediaWiki message delivery on behalf of the 2015 Wikimedia
Foundation Elections Committee, 05:03, 21 April 2015 (UTC) • Translate • Get
help

This is a message from the 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee.
Translations are available.

Voting has begun for eligible voters in the 2015 elections for the Funds
Dissemination Committee (FDC) and FDC Ombudsperson. Questions and discussion
with the candidates for the Funds Dissemination Committee (FDC) and FDC
Ombudsperson will continue during the voting. Nominations for the Board of
Trustees will be accepted until 23:59 UTC May 5.

The Funds Dissemination Committee (FDC) makes recommendations about how to
allocate Wikimedia movement funds to eligible entities. There are five positions
on the committee being filled.

The FDC Ombudsperson receives complaints and feedback about the FDC process,
investigates complaints at the request of the Board of Trustees, and summarizes
the investigations and feedback for the Board of Trustees on an annual basis.
One position is being filled.

The voting phase lasts from 00:00 UTC May 3 to 23:59 UTC May 10. Click here to
vote. Questions and discussion with the candidates will continue during that
time. Click here to ask the FDC candidates a question. Click here to ask the FDC
Ombudsperson candidates a question. More information on the candidates and the
elections can be found on the 2015 FDC election page, the 2015 FDC Ombudsperson
election page, and the 2015 Board election page on Meta-Wiki.

On behalf of the Elections Committee, -Gregory Varnum (User:Varnent) Volunteer
Coordinator, 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee

Posted by the MediaWiki message delivery 03:45, 4 May 2015 (UTC) • Translate •
Get help

This is a message from the 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee.
Translations are available.

Voting has begun for eligible voters in the 2015 elections for the Wikimedia
Foundation Board of Trustees. Questions and discussion with the candidates for
the Board will continue during the voting.

The Wikimedia Foundation Board of Trustees is the ultimate governing authority
of the Wikimedia Foundation, a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization registered in
the United States. The Wikimedia Foundation manages many diverse projects such
as Wikipedia and Commons.

The voting phase lasts from 00:00 UTC May 17 to 23:59 UTC May 31. Click here to
vote. More information on the candidates and the elections can be found on the
2015 Board election page on Meta-Wiki.

On behalf of the Elections Committee, -Gregory Varnum (User:Varnent) Volunteer
Coordinator, 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee

Posted by the MediaWiki message delivery 17:20, 17 May 2015 (UTC) • Translate •
Get help

My apologies for posting this message in English. Please help translate it if
you can.

The Wikimedia Foundation would like your feedback about how we can reimagine
Wikimedia Foundation grants, to better support people and ideas in your
Wikimedia project. Ways to participate:

(Opt-out Instructions) This message was sent by I JethroBT (WMF) through
MediaWiki message delivery. 00:52, 19 August 2015 (UTC)

My apologies for posting this message in English. Please help translate it if
you can.

The Wikimedia Foundation would like your feedback about how we can reimagine
Wikimedia Foundation grants, to better support people and ideas in your
Wikimedia project. Ways to participate:

(Opt-out Instructions) This message was sent by Template:User through MediaWiki
message delivery. 03:37, 19 August 2015 (UTC)

Please help translate the statements on Meta Wiki. You can read more on the
Wikimedia blog.

My apologies for posting this message in English. Please help translate it if
you can.

Greetings! The Individual Engagement Grants program is accepting proposals until
September 29th to fund new tools, community-building processes, and other
experimental ideas that enhance the work of Wikimedia volunteers. Whether you
need a small or large amount of funds (up to $30,000 USD), Individual Engagement
Grants can support you and your team’s project development time in addition to
project expenses such as materials, travel, and rental space.

I JethroBT (WMF), Community Resources, Wikimedia Foundation. 20:52, 4 September
2015 (UTC)

(Opt-out Instructions) This message was sent by I JethroBT (WMF) (talk) through
MediaWiki message delivery.

There is still one week left to submit Individual Engagement Grant (IEG)
proposals before the September 29th deadline. If you have ideas for new tools,
community-building processes, and other experimental projects that enhance the
work of Wikimedia volunteers, start your proposal today! Please encourage others
who have great ideas to apply as well. Support is available if you want help
turning your idea into a grant request.

There is still one week left to submit Individual Engagement Grant (IEG)
proposals before the September 29th deadline. If you have ideas for new tools,
community-building processes, and other experimental projects that enhance the
work of Wikimedia volunteers, start your proposal today! Please encourage others
who have great ideas to apply as well. Support is available if you want help
turning your idea into a grant request.

Last month, we asked for community feedback on a proposal to change the
structure of WMF grant programs. Thanks to the 200+ people who participated! A
report on what we learned and changed based on this consultation is now
available.

Come read about the findings and next steps as WMF’s Community Resources team
begins to implement changes based on your feedback. Your questions and comments
are welcome on the outcomes discussion page.

The Community Advocacy team the Wikimedia Foundation has opened a consultation
on the topic of harassment on Meta. The consultation period is intended to run
for one month from today, November 16, and end on December 17. Please share your
thoughts there on harassment-related issues facing our communities and potential
solutions. (Note: this consultation is not intended to evaluate specific cases
of harassment, but rather to discuss the problem of harassment itself.)

This is a message regarding the proposed 2015 Free Bassel banner. Translations
are available.

This is to inform all Wikimedia contributors that a straw poll seeking your
involvement has just been started on Meta-Wiki.

As some of your might be aware, a small group of Wikimedia volunteers have
proposed a banner campaign informing Wikipedia readers about the urgent
situation of our fellow Wikipedian, open source software developer and Creative
Commons activist, Bassel Khartabil. An exemplary banner and an explanatory page
have now been prepared, and translated into about half a dozen languages by
volunteer translators.

We are seeking your involvement to decide if the global Wikimedia community
approves starting a banner campaign asking Wikipedia readers to call on the
Syrian government to release Bassel from prison. We understand that a campaign
like this would be unprecedented in Wikipedia's history, which is why we're
seeking the widest possible consensus among the community.

Given Bassel's urgent situation and the resulting tight schedule, we ask
everyone to get involved with the poll and the discussion to the widest possible
extent, and to promote it among your communities as soon as possible.

(Apologies for writing in English; please kindly translate this message into
your own language.)

Posted by the MediaWiki message delivery 21:47, 25 November 2015 (UTC) •
Translate • Get help

Patrick Earley (WMF) via MediaWiki message delivery (talk) 01:49, 5 January 2016
(UTC)

Your input is welcome (and greatly desired) at the Meta discussion, 2016
Strategy/Community consultation.

Apologies for English, where this is posted on a non-English project. We thought
it was more important to get the consultation translated as much as possible,
and good headway has been made there in some languages. There is still much to
do, however! We created m:2016 Strategy/Translations to try to help coordinate
what needs translation and what progress is being made. :)

I hope you'll join us! Maggie Dennis via MediaWiki message delivery (talk)
19:07, 18 January 2016 (UTC)

Greetings! The Individual Engagement Grants (IEG) program is accepting proposals
until April 12th to fund new tools, research, outreach efforts, and other
experiments that enhance the work of Wikimedia volunteers. Whether you need a
small or large amount of funds (up to $30,000 USD), IEGs can support you and
your team’s project development time in addition to project expenses such as
materials, travel, and rental space.

Hello, after six weeks of community discussion about Wikipedia to the Moon,
there are now 10 different proposals for content for the mission. Starting
today, you can vote for them on Meta-Wiki, and decide what we will work on: a
Wikipedia canon, different lists, the Moon in 300 languages, an astronomy
editathon, featured articles, articles about technology, endangered things, or
DNA-related topics. You can even vote against community involvement. Voting is
open until 24 June. Sorry that this message is again in English only, but we are
using village pumps to reach as many communities as possible, so that everyone
knows they can vote. Best, Moon team at Wikimedia Deutschland 15:31, 10 June
2016 (UTC)

You may already have heard about Wikipedia to the Moon: A team of scientists
called the “PT Scientists” are going to send a space craft to the moon in 2017
and they want to take Wikipedia along with them. Because Wikipedia is so big, we
cannot send all of it to the moon. That is why the international
Wikipedia-community has voted to send all “Featured Articles and Featured Lists“
from all languages in Wikipedia.

“Featured Articles“ is a category in many language versions of Wikipedia that
collects the very best articles in that language. Your community does not
currently have a „Featured Articles“ category. Ideally, we want to take every
language on Wikipedia to the moon and we also want to take the best articles in
your language. That is why we would like you to tell us what the very best
articles in your language are.

Greetings! The Project Grants program is currently accepting proposals for
funding. There is just over a week left to submit before the October 11
deadline. If you have ideas for software, offline outreach, research, online
community organizing, or other projects that enhance the work of Wikimedia
volunteers, start your proposal today! Please encourage others who have great
ideas to apply as well. Support is available if you want help turning your idea
into a grant request.

Hello! I'm writing from the Wikimedia Foundation to invite you to give your
feedback on a proposed move from CC BY-SA 3.0 to a CC BY-SA 4.0 license across
all Wikimedia projects. The consultation will run from October 5 to November 8,
and we hope to receive a wide range of viewpoints and opinions. Please, if you
are interested, take part in the discussion on Meta-Wiki.

Apologies that this message is only in English. This message can be read and
translated in more languages here. Joe Sutherland (talk) 01:34, 6 October 2016
(UTC)

I apologise that this message is in English.
⧼Centralnotice-shared-help-translate⧽

Select strong passwords – eight or more characters long, and containing letters,
numbers, and punctuation. Joe Sutherland (talk) / MediaWiki message delivery
(talk) 23:59, 13 November 2016 (UTC)

Please accept my apologies - that first line should read "Help with
translations!". Joe Sutherland (WMF) (talk) / MediaWiki message delivery (talk)
00:11, 14 November 2016 (UTC)

James Forrester (Product Manager, Editing department, Wikimedia Foundation)
--19:32, 14 December 2016 (UTC)



https://ki.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gigikuyu

Mũigana wa thiomi cia Abĩrika nĩ gĩcunjĩ kĩmwe gĩa ithatũ gĩa thiomi ciothe cia
thĩ. Imwe cia cio ciaragio mabũrũri-inĩ maingĩ nĩ andũ milioni nyingĩ no nĩ
iteanĩirio na igakomererio nĩ thiomi cia ageni kwambĩrĩria mĩaka ya 1900
kĩambĩrĩria-inĩ. Nĩ ũndũ rũthiomi nĩ ruo rũkuuaga mũtũũrĩre wa andũ mwanya,
thiomi ng’eni itingĩhota gũkuua mũtũũrĩre wa andũ a Abĩrika. Ũhũthĩri wa thiomi
ng’eni mathukuru-inĩ ũrutaga ciana kwaga kwĩyona ũrĩa kwagĩrĩire kana kwĩrora na
maitho ma ageni eene thiomi icio ng’eni cihũthĩraga.

Nĩ gũkoretwo na mĩcemanio mĩingĩ ya kwarĩrĩria ũkũria wa thiomi cia Afrika na
ũhũthĩri wa cio mathomo-inĩ, no maũndũ macio matirĩ mahinga. Thiomi cia Abĩrika
itirakũranĩra na thĩ hamwe na sayanisi ta ũrĩa ciagĩrĩirũo nĩ ũndũ arĩa athomu
kaingĩ matiandĩkaga maũgĩ mao na thiomi icio. Tondũ rũthiomi nĩ ikũmbĩ rĩa
kĩririkano kĩa mũingĩ (Thiong'o, 1986) na nĩ gũkoretwo na ũteanĩria na wonoria
wa ũgĩ kuma thiomi-inĩ cia Afrika hatarĩ gũciongerera ũgĩ mwerũ, mũicoi-nĩ
Abĩrika ĩtigĩtwo na makũmbĩ iberi, tũkĩaria ma kana na ngerekano. Na tondũ ũgĩ
ũrĩa woneka ndũcokagĩrĩra thiomi cia Abĩrika nĩ ũndũ nĩ iteanĩirio, gĩthomo kĩa
Abĩrika gĩtirĩ irĩ kana irĩĩri cia bata. Ĩndĩ, o na kwĩ na ikwĩro ta icio,
mũng’eng’ano wa gũkũria thiomi cia Afrika nĩ wambĩrĩirie na wĩra ũyũ wa bata no
mũhaka ũrĩke tondũ gũtirĩ mũndũ ũngĩhota kũgirĩrĩria rĩciria kahinda ka rĩo ge
gakinyu.

O na thiomi icio ikiaragio nĩ andũ aingĩ ũguo, ti cio ithomithanagia
mathukuruinĩ na o na itithomagwo mabũrũriinĩ maingĩ ma Abirika. Gĩtũmi kĩmwe gĩa
thiomi ici kwaga gũthomithania kana gũthomwo mathukuruinĩ ma Abirika nĩ
gũkomererio nĩ thiomi cia gĩkoronĩ kuma kĩambĩrĩria kĩa mĩaka ya 1900, na gĩtũmi
kĩngĩ nĩ gũteanĩrio nĩ thirikari cia Abirika kuma cianyita “wĩyathi” kwambĩrĩria
mũico wa mĩaka ya 1950. Nĩ guo tũmeye wega kĩrĩa gĩtũmaga thiomi cia Abirika
iteanĩrio ũguo, no mũhaka tũikie maitho harĩ hithitũrĩ ya thiomi cia Abirika
kuma hĩndĩ ya gĩkoronĩ.



https://ki.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thayathi_na_teknoloji

ũũgĩ wa thayathi ũmancte na ũtuĩria ũria ũkoretwo ugĩkwo ni andu miaka mĩigĩ
mĩhĩtũku. Mathomo ma thayathi ni ta mathabu, kemu, bayorojĩ, ũramati ũũgĩ
(knowledge management), injiniarini (engineering) na kombuita(Computer).

Teknorojĩ ĩria ĩrutaga wira ũmwe kana ũkũhanĩrĩrie nĩ icindanaga. Tekinoronjĩ
ĩria ya Cinda nĩ ĩtũmagirwo mũno nĩ andũ tondũ wa mawega maingi mayao, kũrĩiria
cĩa cidwo.

Ũguũki ũtũmagĩrwo kuonania ũrĩa tekinoronjĩ ĩgũthia na mbere na gũkura kana
kwagĩrĩra oũrĩa kahinda karathie na mbere. kwĩ mitaratara mĩangi ĩtũmigirwo
gwĩka ũthuthuria ũyũ. Mũtaratara ũmwe ũthondeketwo mũthingiinĩ wa műkinyaniria
wa Porter(Mahinya matano ma Porter) ũkoragwo na framewaki ya ũgangarũki
tekiniko, thithitemu thiori, na grafu ĩna ndaĩmensoni cia mũnyororo wa kiene na
tekinoronjĩ mwanya mwanya [2]. Mũtaratara ũyũ ũtũmagirwo gũthondeka mapu ya bara
ya kũĩgereria ũria Tekinoronjĩ ĩgĩkũra. Kwĩ ũguũki wa tekinoronjĩ na wa ũguũki
wa Biacara



