https://st.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lesotho

Lesotho ke naha e boroa ho Afrika e teetsoeng hare ke naha ea Afrika Boroa.
Motse-moholo oa eona ke Maseru. Baahi ba Lesotho ba ka balloa ho 2 067 000
(2009). Ho buuoa Sesotho 'me le baahi ba teng ke Basotho. Lesotho ke setho sa
Machaba A Kopaneng - (Commonwealth).

Lesotho la mehleng ena leseng le bitswa Basutoland, le hlaheletse le le leng
tlasa morena Moshoeshoe I ka 1822. Moshoeshoe Mora wa Mokhachane, mohale e
monyane wa Bakoteli, o qadile hoba kgosi ka selemo sa 1804. Pakeng tsa selemo sa
1821 le 1823 baile ba phuthuluha thabeng tsa Butha-Buthe, ho kenyeleditswe le
bahale ba mehleng kgahlano le Lifaqane le mohlabani e moholo Shaka Zulu ka
selemo sa 1818 le 1828.

Ketsahalong tsa kgalekgale ho bonahetse hona le dikgohlano pakeng tsa balwanedi
ba (British) BRITANI le maDatjha ho ileng ha baka merusu ho baitseki ba (Cape
Colony) holatela ntwa ebileng teng ka lebaka la maFora le maDatjha, ka (BRITANI)
BRITISH ka selemo sa 1795. Lehaholejwalo ba amahangwa diketsahalong tseo ke
Senqu le ba Orange Free State. Moshoeshoe I oile a mema batho hotswa naheng tse
ding hotla fana ka tshebeletso, eleng Thomas Arbousset, Eug√®ne Casalis le
Constant Gosselin hotswa Paris hotla fana ka lentswe metseng le sebakeng sa
Morija hotisa tumelo le hofana ka mesebetsi ya ho ngola ka motjhini ka puo ya
Sesotho pakeng tsa selemo sa 1837 hoisa 1855. Casillas eleng letsoho la phetolo
ya puo le mofani wa dikeletso naheng tsa matjhaba.o ile aba le seabo
phumantshong ya dithunya kgahlano le EUROPEANS le batho ba GRIGUA.

Tulo ya geokerafi ya Lesotho e etsa hobe thata ntshetsopele ya naha ka
sepolotiki le muruong wa naha ya Afrika Borwa.

Diletswa tsa mmino wa setso tse kenyeletsang lekolulo, eleng mofuta wa seletswa
se letswang ke bashanyana naheng, setolotolo eleng seletswa se letswang ke banna
ka melomo ya bona,le seletswa sa basadi e leng thomo.



https://st.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boloetse_ba_kokwanahloko_ya_Ebola

Kokwanahloko ya boloetse ba Ebola (EVD) kapa Feberu ya phallo ya madi ya Ebola
(EHF) ke boloetse ba batho bo bokwang ke kokwanahloko ya Ebola. Matshwao
hantlentle a qala matsatsi a mabedi ho isa ho a mararo ka mora ho tshwaetswa ke
kokwanahloko, feberu, mmetso o bohloko, mesifa e opang, le hlooho e opang.
Hantlentle ho nyekelwa ke pelo, ho hlatsa, le letshollo di a latela ho
tsamaisanang le phoketseho ya ho sebetsa ha sebete le diphio. Mothating ona,
batho ba itseng ba qalella ho ba le matha a ho tswa madi .

Kokwanahloko e fumanwa ka ho ama madi kapa ma lero la mmele a phoofolo e
tshwaeditsweng (haholoholo ditshwene kapa bommankgane ba difateng). Ho hasanngwa
ke moya ha ho so ka ho ngolwa ka hona tikolohong e tlwaelehileng. Ho kgolwa hore
bommankgane ba difateng ba fetisa le ho hasanya kokwanahloko ntle le hore bona
ba amehe ke yona. Hang ha tshwaetso bathong e ba teng, bohloko bo ka nama
mahareng a batho jwalo. Banna ba phonyohileng boloetseng bona ba kgona ho bo
fetistsa ka peo a bonna nakong e ka etsang dikgwedi tse pedi. Hantlentle, ele
hore ho hlahlobiswe maloetse a mang a nang le matshwao a jwaloka malaria,
kholera le dikokwanahloko tsa feberu ya phallo ya madi tse ding di qhelelwa ka
thoko sethatong. Ho netefatsa tlhahlobo ya disampole tsa madi di entswe diteko
tsa kokwanahloko dibolaya dikokwanahloko, dikokwanahloko RNA, kapa kokwanahloko
ka boyona.

Thibelo e kenyeleditse ho fokotsa ho hasanngwa ha boloetse ho tswa ditshweneng
le dikolobeng tse tshwaeditsweng ho ya bathong. Hona ho ka etswa ka ho hlahloba
tshwaetso diphoofolo tse jwalo ka ho di bolaya le ho lahla ditopo tsa tsona ka
tsela e nepahetseng haeba ho fumanwa di na le boloetse. Ho pheha nama ka ho
phethahala le ho apara diaporo tse sireletsang ha ho sebetswanwa le nama ho ka
ba le thuso, kaha ho apara diaparo tse sireletssang le ho hlapa matsoho ha re le
hara batho ba nang le boloetse. Disampole tsa maro le dikarolo tse tswang
bathong ba nang le boloetse di tshwanala ho tshwarwa ka tlhokomelo e
ikgethileng.

Ha ho kalafo e ikgethang bakeng sa boloetse; mawala a ho thusa batho ba
tshwaeditsweng a kenyeletsa ho fana ka kalafo ya ho ba nwesa metsi ka lehano
(metsi a tswekerenyana le letswainyana bakeng sa hore ba nwe) kapa ho kenya maro
ka methapo ya madi. Boloetse bo na le sekgahla se hodimo: hangata bo boloya
mahareng a 50% le 90% a ba nang le kokwanahloko. EVD e ile ya hlokomelwa Sudan
le Demoratic Republic of Congo. Boloetse bona hantlentle bo ropoha mabatoweng a
diteropiki tsa Afrika e Borwa ho Sahara. Ho tloha ka 1976 ( ha bo ne bo bonwa
lekgetlo la pele) ho fihla ka 2013, batho ba ka tlasenyana ho 1,000 ka selemo ba
bile le tshwaetso. Ho ropoha ho hoholohadi ho fihlela jwale ho tswelang pele ke
ho ropoha ha Ebola Afrika Bophirima ka 2014, ho amang Guinea, Sierra Leone,
Liberia le ho kannang ha etsahala Nigeria. Ho tloha ka Phato 2014 ditlaleho tse
fetang 1600 di se di ile tsa etswa. Mawala a ntse a tswelang pele a ho hlahisa
ente; leha ho le jwalo, ha ho so be le a atlehang.



https://st.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leishmaniasis

Leishemaniasis, hape e peletwa e le leishmaniosis, ke bolwetse bo bakwang ke
dinwamadi sa protozoa ya genus "Leishmania" mme di hasanngwa ke ho longwa ke
mofuta o mong wa dintsintsi tsa lehlabathe. Bolwetse bona bo bonahala ka ditsela
tse tharo tse kgolo: cutaneous, mucocutaneous, kapa visceral leishmaniasis.
Mofuta wa cutaneous o bonahala ka diso (dialsa) tsa letlalo, ha mofuta wa
mucocutaneous o bonahala ka diso tsa letlalo, molomo, le nko, mme mofuta wa
visceral o qala ka diso tsa letlalo mme ebe hamorao o bonahala ka feberu,
phokotseho ya disele tse kgubedu tsa madi, le ho atoloha ha lebete le sebete.

Ditshwaetso bathong di bakwa ke mefuta e fetang e 20 ya "Leishmania". Disosa tsa
kotsi di kenyeleditse bofuma, phepompe, phokotseho ya meru, le phallelo
ditoropong. Mefuta ena e meraro e ka hlahlojwa ka ho bona dinwamadi ka
maekroskoupu. Ho feta moo, bolwetse ba visceral bo ka hlahlojwa ka diteko tsa
madi.

Leishmmaniasis e ka thibelwa hannyane ka ho robala tlasa dinete tse fafaditsweng
ka sebolayadikokonyana. Mehato e meng e kenyeletsa ho nyanyatsa
sebolayadikokonyana ho bolaya dintsintsi tsa lehlabathe le ho alafa batho ba
nang le tshwaetso esale pele ho thibela ho ata ha bona. Qeto e nkuwang ya kalafo
e hlokahalang e laolwa ke hore tshwaetso ya bolwetse e fumanwe ho kae, mefuta ya
"Leishmania", le mofuta wa tshwaetso. Meriana e itseng e kannang ya sebediswa
bakeng sa bolwetse ba visceral e kenyeletsa liposomal amphotericin B, motswako
wa pentavalent antimonialsleparomomycin, le miltefosine. Bakeng sa bolwetse ba
cutaneous, paromomycin, fluconazole, kapa pentamidine e kanna ya ba le tshebetso
e ntle.

Batho ba ka bang dimilione tse 12 mothating wa jwale ba na le tshwaetso dinaheng
tse ka bang 98. Ditlaleho tse ntjha tse ka bang dimilione tse 2 le mafu a
mahareng a dikete tse 20 le tse 50 a etsahala selemo se seng le se seng. Batho
ba ka bang dimilione tse 200 Asia, Afrika, Amerika Borwa le Amerika Bohareng, le
Yuropa e ka borwa ba dula dibakeng tseo bolwetse bo tlalehilweng. Mokgatlo wa
Lefatshe wa Bophelo bo Botle (World Health Organisation) o fumane theolelo ya
emeng ya meriana ya ho alafa bolwetse. Bolwetse bo kanna ba hlaha palong e
itseng ya diphoofolo tse ding, ho kenyeleditswe dintja le diroto.



https://st.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia%3aPotjho_e_kopano

No, seriously. After "reading" these articles I now know less Sesotho than I
used to before... - ZyXoas

I'm from South Africa yay! I don't speak Sotho, I'm Afrikaans, but Sotho's such
a rad language! My one friend's Sotho, she's so cool lol... but yeah. Anyways
bye. 41.243.1.63 13:27, 23 Phupjane 2007 (UTC)

"Metsotso e mashome a meraro ka mora hora ya leshome" would be 10:30. Mohau
04:27, 30 Phato 2011 (UTC)

Hello. To facilitate steward granting of bot access, I suggest implementing the
standard bot policy on this wiki. In particular, this policy allows stewards to
automatically flag known interlanguage linking bots (if this page says that is
acceptable), which form the vast majority of such requests. The policy also
enables global bots on this wiki (if this page says that is acceptable), which
are trusted bots that will be given bot access on every wiki that allows global
bots.

This policy makes bot access requesting much easier for local users, operators,
and stewards. To implement it we only need to create a redirect to this page
from Project:Bot policy, and add a line at the top noting that it is used here.
Please read the text at m:Bot policy before commenting. If you object, please
say so; I hope to implement in one week if there is no objection, since it is
particularly written to streamline bot requests on wikis with little or no
community interested in bot access requests. --Luckas Blade 16:37, 1 Hlakubele
2009 (UTC)

Dear all, this is to request a bot flag for Synthebot. Its technical information
is summarized below.

Further technical information is available on its main page. Thank you in
advance. Regards, --Julian 18:06, 10 Tshitwe 2008 (UTC)

Dear community. I am writing to you to promote a special wiki called Betawiki.
This wiki facilitates the localisation (l10n) of the MediaWiki interface. You
may have changed many messages here to use your language in the interface, but
if you would log in to for example the Japanese language Wiktionary, you would
not be able to use the interface as well translated as here. In fact, of 1,736
messages in the core of MediaWiki, 5.99% of the messages have been translated.
Betawiki also supports the translation of messages for 126 extensions, with
2,174 messages. Many of them are used in WMF projects and they are vital for
understanding the wiki. Currently 0.00% of the WMF extension messages have been
translated. Translators for over 90 languages contribute their work to MediaWiki
this way every month.

If you wish to contribute to better support of your language in MediaWiki, as
well as for many MediaWiki extensions, please visit Betawiki, create an account
and request translator privileges. You can see the current status of
localisation of your language on MediaWiki.org and do not forget to get in touch
with others that may already be working on your language on Betawiki.

If you have any further questions, please let me know on my talk page on
Betawiki. We will try and assist you as much as possible, for example by
importing all messages from a local wiki for you to start with, if you so
desire.

You can also find us on the Freenode IRC network in the channel #mediawiki-i18n
where we will be happy to help you get started.

Thank you very much for your attention and I do hope to see some of you on
Betawiki soon! Thanks, GerardM@Betawiki

Could someome be so kind and move my contribution to your "village pump" and
also, could someone please add a link to your village pump on meta¬†? Thanks,
GerardM 11:15, 20 January 2008 (UTC)

The LocalisationUpdate extension is now enabled for all Wikimedia projects. From
now on new localisations that become available in SVN will become available to
your project within 24 hours. Your localisations get into SVN from
translatewiki.net typically within a day and at worst in two days. This is a
huge improvement from the old practice where the localisations became available
with new software. This could take weeks, even months.

Local messages have an impact on the performance of our system. It is best when
messages are as much as possible part of the system messages. In order to remove
unnecessary duplication, all the messages that have a local localisation and are
exactly the same as the system message will be removed. What we ask you to do is
to compare and proof read the messages in translatewiki.net and the local
messages. You can then either remove local messages when the translatewiki.net
message is to be preferred or, you can update the message at translatewiki.net.

The best way to answer the first question is to visit the translatewiki.net.
Change the language to your language, select the ‚Äúvector‚Äù skin and add the
advanced tool bar in in the preferences and check out the new functionality. And
make some changes in your user page. When there is a need to improve on the
localisation, please make the necessary changess . It should update your
localisation straight away. We would like you to report each issue individually
at http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Usability_issues.

We would like you to report each issue individually at
http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Language_issues. The issues you raise will all be
assessed. It is important to keep each issue separate, because this will make it
easier to understand the issues and find solutions.

PS This text has been approved by Naoko, Brion and Siebrand. Thanks, GerardM
18:35, 30 Lwetse 2009 (UTC)

Hello! I am a Polish wikipedian and I would like to ask you for your help -
writing a new article about former Polish President who won the Nobel Peace
Prize in 1983 ‚Äì Lech Wa≈Çƒôsa. I have looked for his biography in your Wikipedia
but without success. Polish Wikipedians will be grateful for your help. Thank
you so much in advance! PS you can find the English version of the article here.
Best wishes from Poland, Patrol110 16:59, 26 Tshitwe 2009 (UTC)

The call for applications for Wikimania Scholarships to attend Wikimania 2010 in
Gdansk, Poland (July 9-11) is now open. The Wikimedia Foundation offers
Scholarships to pay for selected individuals' round trip travel, accommodations,
and registration at the conference. To apply, visit the Wikimania 2010
scholarships information page, click the secure link available there, and fill
out the form to apply. For additional information, please visit the Scholarships
information and FAQ pages:

The Wikimedia Foundation recently updated the official Wikipedia globe. We
realize that a lot of projects have never had a localized logo in their native
language, so we are making sure that we create logos for every Wikipedia project
that we have. The only issue is: we can't figure out what should be on your
localized logo. :-)

Please put the translation on my Meta talk page. Thank you! Cbrown1023 moqoqo
00:57, 25 Motsheanong 2010 (UTC)

Greetings! Discussion is underway to set up a local South African Wikimedia
Chapter. There are currently over 25 chapters established around the world, but
so far, none in Africa. Currently a group of local Wikipedians are in the
process of setting up the South African chapter. If you're interested in being
involved in the creation of a South African Wikimedia Chapter, please add your
name to the Meta page and also join the mailing list here. Also, email me
directly if you would like to be involved in the kickoff Chapter workshop
scheduled to be held at Wits University on 7th and 8th August. Thanks, Kaydee 68
17:39, 28 Phupu 2010 (UTC)

Hello Wikipedians, I am Theo and I am working for the Wikimedia Foundation
during the 2010 Fundraiser. My job is to be the liaison between your community
and the Foundation. This year's fundraiser is intended to be a collaborative and
global effort; we recognize that banner messages which may perform well in the
United States don't necessarily translate well, or appeal to international
audiences.

I'm contacting you as I am currently looking for translators who are willing to
contribute to this project by helping translate and localize messages into
different languages and suggesting messages that would appeal to your readers on
the Fundraising Meta Page. We've started the setup on meta for both banner
submission, statistical analysis, and grouping volunteers together. Use the talk
pages on meta, talk to your local communities, talk to others, talk to us, and
add your feedback to the proposed messages as well! I look forward to working
with you during this year's fundraiser. If someone could translate this message
I would really appreciate it so that everyone is able to understand our goals
and contribute to this year's campaign. Theo (WMF) 20:49, 20 Mphalane 2010 (UTC)

Hallo, my name is Anastasiya Lvova, I'm "duty" in Connectivity project. The
essence of the "Connectivity" project is to study and enhance the coherence of
Wikipedia, or, in other words, to improve hypertext navigation between articles.
The project deals with deadends, isolated articles, non-categorized articles,
transitivity of the category tree, etc.

We want to work with your language version, but we need configured
MediaWiki:Disambiguationspage for it (with direct links to template namespace
pages, for example,
ru:MediaWiki:Disambiguationspage/de:MediaWiki:Disambiguationspage/fr:MediaWiki:D
isambiguationspage). Is it possible to set it up for our usage?

Dear friends, may I ask you to add a hyperlink to our Tatar Wikipedia
(http://tt.wikipedia.org) to your Front page. Tatars - are turkic nation living
in Tatarstan Republic, second biggest nation in Russian Federation. hope to hear
from you soon. sincerely yours, Muhtac 21:44, 20 Hlakubele 2011 (UTC)

Further details and educational materials will be available shortly. The
referendum is scheduled for 12-27 August, 2011, and will be conducted on servers
hosted by a neutral third party. Referendum details, officials, voting
requirements, and supporting materials will be posted at Meta:Image filter
referendum shortly.

Sorry for delivering you a message in English. Please help translate the pages
on the referendum on Meta and join the translators mailing list.

For the coordinating committee, Philippe (WMF) Cbrown1023 Risker Mardetanha
PeterSymonds Robert Harris

I humbly request bot status on this wiki in order to maintain Interwiki. Thank
you --Hedwig in Washington 20:34, 24 Mphalane 2011 (UTC)

I apologize that you are receiving this message in English. Please help
translate it.

The Wikimedia Foundation is discussing changes to its Terms of Use. The
discussion can be found at Talk:Terms of use. Everyone is invited to join in.
Because the new version of Terms of use is not in final form, we are not able to
present official translations of it. Volunteers are welcome to translate it, as
German volunteers have done at m:Terms of use/de, but we ask that you note at
the top that the translation is unofficial and may become outdated as the
English version is changed. The translation request can be found at
m:Translation requests/WMF/Terms of Use 2 -- Maggie Dennis, Community Liaison
01:18, 27 Mphalane 2011 (UTC)

I apologize that you are receiving this message in English. Please help
translate it.

The Wikimedia Foundation is seeking Community Fellows and project ideas for the
Community Fellowship Program. A Fellowship is a temporary position at the
Wikimedia Foundation in order to work on a specific project or set of projects.
Submissions for 2012 are encouraged to focus on the theme of improving editor
retention and increasing participation in Wikimedia projects. If interested,
please submit a project idea or apply to be a fellow by January 15, 2012. Please
visit https://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Wikimedia_Fellowships for more
information.

--Siko Bouterse, Head of Community Fellowships, Wikimedia Foundation 03:06, 22
Tshitwe 2011 (UTC)

Wikimedia Foundation is getting ready to push out 1.19 to all the WMF-hosted
wikis. As we finish wrapping up our code review, you can test the new version
right now on beta.wmflabs.org. For more information, please read the release
notes or the start of the final announcement.

Report any problems on the labs beta wiki and we'll work to address them before
they software is released to the production wikis.

Note that this cluster does have SUL but it is not integrated with SUL in
production, so you'll need to create another account. You should avoid using the
same password as you use here. ‚Äî Global message delivery 16:35, 15 Pherekgong
2012 (UTC)

(Apologies if this message isn't in your language.) The Wikimedia Foundation is
planning to upgrade MediaWiki (the software powering this wiki) to its latest
version this month. You can help to test it before it is enabled, to avoid
disruption and breakage. More information is available in the full announcement.
Thank you for your understanding.

Guillaume Paumier, via the Global message delivery system (wrong page? You can
fix it.). 15:19, 12 Hlakola 2012 (UTC)

The Wikimedia Foundation has brought together a new team of developers who are
dedicated to language support. This team is to support all the languages and
consequently it is not realistic to expect that the team members can provide
proper support for your language. It is for this reason that we are looking for
volunteers who will make up a language support team.

As much of the activity will be concentrated on translatewiki.net, it will be a
plus when team members know how to localise at translatewiki.net. Thanks,
Gmeijssen 07:23, 15 Hlakola 2012 (UTC)

The babel extension is used by people to indicate their proficiency in a
language. Sadly this extension is not yet localised in your language. Would you
be so kind and help us by localising the babel extension in your language.
Thanks, Gmeijssen 07:23, 15 Hlakola 2012 (UTC)

(Apologies if this message isn't in your language. Please consider translating
it, as well as the full version of this announcement on Meta)

The Wikimedia Foundation is planning to do limited testing of IPv6 on June 2-3.
If there are not too many problems, we may fully enable IPv6 on World IPv6 day
(June 6), and keep it enabled.

Read the full version of this announcement on how to test the behavior of IPv6
with various tools and how to leave bug reports, and to find a fuller analysis
of the implications of the IPv6 migration.

--Erik M√∂ller, VP of Engineering and Product Development, Wikimedia Foundation
01:24, 2 Phupjane 2012 (UTC)

Wikimedia Commons is happy to announce that the 2011 Picture of the Year
competition is now open. We are interested in your opinion as to which images
qualify to be the Picture of the Year 2011. Any user registered at Commons or a
Wikimedia wiki SUL-related to Commons with more than 75 edits before 1 April
2012 (UTC) is welcome to vote and, of course everyone is welcome to view!

About 600 of the best of Wikimedia Common's photos, animations, movies and
graphics were chosen ‚Äìby the international Wikimedia Commons community‚Äì out of
12 million files during 2011 and are now called Featured Pictures.

From professional animal and plant shots to breathtaking panoramas and skylines,
restorations of historically relevant images, images portraying the world's best
architecture, maps, emblems, diagrams created with the most modern technology,
and impressive human portraits, Commons Features Pictures of all flavors.

See you on Commons! --Picture of the Year 2011 Committee 18:40, 5 Phupjane 2012
(UTC)

(Apologies if this message isn't in your language. Please consider translating
it)

As many of you are aware, the Wikimedia Board of Trustees recently initiated
important changes in the way that money is being distributed within the
Wikimedia movement. As part of this, a new community-led "Funds Dissemination
Committee" (FDC) is currently being set up. Already in 2012-13, its
recommendations will guide the decisions about the distribution of over 10
million US dollars among the Foundation, chapters and other eligible entities.

Now, seven capable, knowledgeable and trustworthy community members are sought
to volunteer on the initial Funds Dissemination Committee. It is expected to
take up its work in September. In addition, a community member is sought to be
the Ombudsperson for the FDC process. If you are interested in joining the
committee, read the call for volunteers. Nominations are planned to close on
August 15.

--Anasuya Sengupta, Director of Global Learning and Grantmaking, Wikimedia
Foundation 20:26, 19 Phupu 2012 (UTC)

You might also be interested in the idea to create a central Wikipedia Library
where approved editors would have access to all participating resource donors.
Add your feedback to the Community Fellowship proposal. Apologies for the
English message (translate here). Go sign up¬†:) --Ocaasi (talk) 02:25, 16 Phato
2012 (UTC)

I apologize for addressing you in English. I would be grateful if you could
translate this message into your language.

The Wikimedia Foundation is conducting a request for comment on a proposed
program that could provide legal assistance to users in specific support roles
who are named in a legal complaint as a defendant because of those roles. We
wanted to be sure that your community was aware of this discussion and would
have a chance to participate in that discussion.

If this page is not the best place to publicize this request for comment, please
help spread the word to those who may be interested in participating. (If you'd
like to help translating the "request for comment", program policy or other
pages into your language and don't know how the translation system works, please
come by my user talk page at m:User talk:Mdennis (WMF). I'll be happy to assist
or to connect you with a volunteer who can assist.)

As some of you might already have heard Wikimedia Deutschland is working on a
new Wikimedia project. It is called m:Wikidata. The goal of Wikidata is to
become a central data repository for the Wikipedias, its sister projects and the
world. In the future it will hold data like the number of inhabitants of a
country, the date of birth of a famous person or the length of a river. These
can then be used in all Wikimedia projects and outside of them.

It'd be great if you could join us, test the demo version, provide feedback and
take part in the development of Wikidata. You can find all the relevant
information including an FAQ and sign-up links for our on-wiki newsletter on the
Wikidata page on Meta.

For further discussions please use this talk page (if you are uncomfortable
writing in English you can also write in your native language there) or point me
to the place where your discussion is happening so I can answer there.

The only pre-requisite is for the volunteer to actually live in the country and
to have access to at least one donation method that we offer for that country
(mainly credit/debit card, but also real-time banking like IDEAL, E-wallets,
etc...) so we can do a live test and see if the donation goes through. All
volunteers will be reimbursed of the donations that eventually succeed (and they
will be low amounts, like 1-2 dollars)

(Apologies if this message isn't in your language.) Next week, the Wikimedia
Foundation will transition its main technical operations to a new data center in
Ashburn, Virginia, USA. This is intended to improve the technical performance
and reliability of all Wikimedia sites, including this wiki. There will be some
times when the site will be in read-only mode, and there may be full outages;
the current target windows for the migration are January 22nd, 23rd and 24th,
2013, from 17:00 to 01:00 UTC (see other timezones on timeanddate.com). More
information is available in the full announcement.

If you would like to stay informed of future technical upgrades, consider
becoming a Tech ambassador and joining the ambassadors mailing list. You will be
able to help your fellow Wikimedians have a voice in technical discussions and
be notified of important decisions.

Guillaume Paumier, via the Global message delivery system (wrong page? You can
fix it.). 15:43, 19 Pherekgong 2013 (UTC)

Wikidata has been in development for a few months now. It is now time for the
roll-out of the first part of it on your Wikipedia. Phase 1 is the support for
the management of language links. It is already being used on the Hungarian,
Hebrew, Italian and English Wikipedias. The next step is to enable the extension
on all other Wikipedias. We have currently planned this for March 6.

Editors on en:wp have created a great page with all the necessary information
for editors and there is also an FAQ for this deployment. Please ask questions
you might have on the FAQ‚Äôs discussion page.

To stay up-to-date on everything happening around Wikidata please subscribe to
the newsletter that is delivered weekly to subscribed user‚Äôs talk pages. You can
see previous editions here.

Sorry for writing in English. I hope someone can translate this locally. If you
understand German better than English you can have a look at the announcement on
de:Wikipedia:Kurier.

As I annonced 2 weeks ago, Wikidata phase 1 (language links) has been deployed
here today. Language links in the sidebar are coming from Wikidata in addition
to the ones in the wiki text. To edit them, scroll to the bottom of the language
links, and click edit. You no longer need to maintain these links by hand in the
wiki text of the article.

Where can I find more information and ask questions? Editors on en:wp have
created a great page with all the necessary information for editors and there is
also an FAQ for this deployment. It'd be great if you could bring this to this
wiki if that has not already happened. Please ask questions you might have on
the FAQ‚Äôs discussion page.

I want to be kept up to date about Wikidata To stay up-to-date on everything
happening around Wikidata please subscribe to the newsletter that is delivered
weekly to subscribed user‚Äôs talk pages.

(Please consider translating this message for the benefit of your fellow
Wikimedians)

Greetings. As you might have seen on the Wikimedia tech blog or the tech
ambassadors list, a new functionality called "Lua" is being enabled on all
Wikimedia sites today. Lua is a scripting language that enables you to write
faster and more powerful MediaWiki templates.

If you have questions about how to convert existing templates to Lua (or how to
create new ones), we'll be holding two support sessions on IRC next week: one on
Wednesday (for Oceania, Asia & America) and one on Friday (for Europe, Africa &
America); see m:IRC office hours for the details. If you can't make it, you can
also get help at mw:Talk:Lua scripting.

If you'd like to learn about this kind of events earlier in advance, consider
becoming a Tech ambassador by subscribing to the mailing list. You will also be
able to help your fellow Wikimedians have a voice in technical discussions and
be notified of important decisions.

Guillaume Paumier, via the Global message delivery system. 20:24, 13 Hlakubele
2013 (UTC) (wrong page? You can fix it.)

Sorry for writing in English. I hope someone can translate this. If you
understand German better than English you can have a look at the announcement on
de:Wikipedia:Kurier.

A while ago the first phase of Wikidata was enabled on this Wikipedia. This
means you are getting the language links in each article from Wikidata. It is
soon time to enable the second phase of Wikidata (infoboxes) here. We have
already done this on the [first 11 Wikipedias] (it, he, hu, ru, tr, uk, uz, hr,
bs, sr, sh) and things are looking good. The next step is English Wikipedia.
This is planned for April 8. If everything works out fine we will deploy on all
remaining Wikipedias on April 10. I will update this part of the FAQ if there
are any issues forcing us to change this date. I will also sent another note to
this village pump once the deployment is finished.

What will happen once we have phase 2 enabled here? Once it is enabled in a few
days you will be able to make use of the structured data that is available on
Wikidata in your articles/infoboxes. It includes things like the symbol for a
chemical element, the ISBN for a book or the top level domain of a country.
(None of this will happen automatically. Someone will have to change the article
or infobox template for this to happen!)

We are working on expanding the parser function so you can for example use
{{#property:chief executive officer}} instead of {{#property:p169}}. The
complete plan for this is here.

Where can I find more information and ask questions? We have collected the main
questions in an FAQ for this deployment. Please ask questions you might have on
the FAQ‚Äôs discussion page.

I want to be kept up to date about Wikidata To stay up-to-date on everything
happening around Wikidata please subscribe to the newsletter that is delivered
weekly to subscribed user‚Äôs talk pages.

(Please consider translating this message for the benefit of your fellow
Wikimedians. Please also consider translating the proposal.)

Read this message in English / Lleer esti mensaxe n'asturianu / ‡¶¨‡¶æ‡¶Ç‡¶≤‡¶æ‡¶Ø‡¶º ‡¶è‡¶á
‡¶¨‡¶æ‡¶∞‡ßç‡¶§‡¶æ‡¶ü‡¶ø ‡¶™‡¶°‡¶º‡ßÅ‡¶® / Llegiu aquest missatge en catal√† / L√¶s denne besked p√• dansk /
Lies diese Nachricht auf Deutsch / Le≈õ cal mesag' ch√® in Emili√†n / Leer este
mensaje en espa√±ol / Lue t√§m√§ viesti suomeksi / Lire ce message en fran√ßais /
Ler esta mensaxe en galego / ‡§π‡§ø‡§®‡•ç‡§¶‡•Ä / Proƒçitajte ovu poruku na hrvatskom / Baca
pesan ini dalam Bahasa Indonesia / Leggi questo messaggio in italiano / ‡≤à
‡≤∏‡≤Ç‡≤¶‡≥á‡≤∂‡≤µ‡≤®‡≥ç‡≤®‡≥Å ‡≤ï‡≤®‡≥ç‡≤®‡≤°‡≤¶‡≤≤‡≥ç‡≤≤‡≤ø ‡≤ì‡≤¶‡≤ø / Aqra dan il-messaƒ°ƒ° bil-Malti / norsk (bokm√•l) /
Lees dit bericht in het Nederlands / Przeczytaj tƒô wiadomo≈õƒá po polsku / Citi»õi
acest mesaj √Æn rom√¢nƒÉ / –ü—Ä–æ—á–∏—Ç–∞—Ç—å —ç—Ç–æ —Å–æ–æ–±—â–µ–Ω–∏–µ –Ω–∞ —Ä—É—Å—Å–∫–æ–º / Farriintaan ku aqri
Af-Soomaali / Proƒçitaj ovu poruku na srpskom (–ü—Ä–æ—á–∏—Ç–∞—ò –æ–≤—É –ø–æ—Ä—É–∫—É –Ω–∞ —Å—Ä–ø—Å–∫–æ–º) /
‡∏≠‡πà‡∏≤‡∏ô‡∏Ç‡πâ‡∏≠‡∏Ñ‡∏ß‡∏≤‡∏°‡∏ô‡∏µ‡πâ‡πÉ‡∏ô‡∏†‡∏≤‡∏©‡∏≤‡πÑ‡∏ó‡∏¢ / –ü—Ä–æ—á–∏—Ç–∞—Ç–∏ —Ü–µ –ø–æ–≤—ñ–¥–æ–º–ª–µ–Ω–Ω—è —É–∫—Ä–∞—ó–Ω—Å—å–∫–æ—é –º–æ–≤–æ—é / ƒê·ªçc
th√¥ng b√°o b·∫±ng ti·∫øng Vi·ªát / ‰ΩøÁî®‰∏≠ÊñáÈòÖËØªÊú¨‰ø°ÊÅØ„ÄÇ

There is a new request for comment on Meta-Wiki concerning the removal of
administrative rights from long-term inactive Wikimedians. Generally, this
proposal from stewards would apply to wikis without an administrators' review
process.

We are also compiling a list of projects with procedures for removing inactive
administrators on the talk page of the request for comment. Feel free to add
your project(s) to the list if you have a policy on administrator inactivity.

Thanks, Billinghurst (thanks to all the translators!) 05:21, 24 Mmesa 2013 (UTC)

Sorry for writing in English. I hope someone can translate this. If you
understand German better than English you can have a look at the announcement on
de:Wikipedia:Kurier.

A while ago the first phase of Wikidata was enabled on this Wikipedia. This
means you are getting the language links in each article from Wikidata. We have
now enabled the second phase of Wikidata (infoboxes) here. We have already done
this on the [first 11 Wikipedias] (it, he, hu, ru, tr, uk, uz, hr, bs, sr, sh) a
month ago and two days ago on the English Wikipedia. Today all the remaining
Wikipedias followed.

What does having phase 2 enabled here mean? You are now able to make use of the
structured data that is available on Wikidata in your articles/infoboxes. It
includes things like the symbol for a chemical element, the ISBN for a book or
the top level domain of a country. (None of this will happen automatically.
Someone will have to change the article or infobox template for this to happen!)
The current state is just the beginning though. It will be extended based on
feedback we get from you now.

We are working on expanding the parser function so you can for example use
{{#property:headquarter location}} instead of {{#property:p159}}. The complete
plan for this is here.

Where can I test this? You can test it on test2 if you don't want to do it in an
article here.

Where can I find more information and ask questions? We have collected the main
questions in an FAQ for this deployment. Please ask questions you might have on
the FAQ‚Äôs discussion page.

I want to be kept up to date about Wikidata To stay up-to-date on everything
happening around Wikidata please subscribe to the newsletter that is delivered
weekly to subscribed user‚Äôs talk pages.

We are excited about taking yet another step towards allowing all Wikipedias
share structured data and collect and curate it together. --Lydia Pintscher
19:21, 24 Mmesa 2013 (UTC)

Hi, apologies for posting this in English, but I wanted to alert your community
to a discussion on Meta about potential changes to the Wikimedia Trademark
Policy. Please translate this statement if you can. We hope that you will all
participate in the discussion; we also welcome translations of the legal team‚Äôs
statement into as many languages as possible and encourage you to voice your
thoughts there. Please see the Trademark practices discussion (on Meta-Wiki) for
more information. Thank you! --Mdennis (WMF) (talk)

The Wikipedia Library gets Wikipedia editors free access to reliable sources
that are behind paywalls. I want to alert you to our latest donation.

My apologies for the incorrect link: You can sign up for Cochrane Collaboration
accounts at the COCHRANE sign-up page. Cheers, Ocaasi 21:54, 16 Phupjane 2013
(UTC)

Hello, Sorry for English but It's very important for bot operators so I hope
someone translates this. Pywikipedia is migrating to Git so after July 26, SVN
checkouts won't be updated If you're using Pywikipedia you have to switch to
git, otherwise you will use out-dated framework and your bot might not work
properly. There is a manual for doing that and a blog post explaining about this
change in non-technical language. If you have question feel free to ask in
mw:Manual talk:Pywikipediabot/Gerrit, mailing list, or in the IRC channel. Best
Amir (via Global message delivery). 13:48, 23 Phupu 2013 (UTC)

The Wikimedia Foundation will soon turn on VisualEditor for all users, all the
time on your Wikipedia. Right now your Wikipedia does not have any local
documents on VisualEditor, and we hope that your community can change that. To
find out about how you can help with translations visit the TranslationCentral
for VisualEditor and read the easy instructions on bringing information to your
Wikipedia. The User Guide and the FAQ are very important to have in your
language.

We want to find out as much as we can from you about VisualEditor and how it
helps your Wikipedia, and having local pages is a great way to start. We also
encourage you to leave feedback on Mediawiki where the community can offer
ideas, opinions, and point out bugs that may still exist in the software that
need to be reported to Bugzilla. If you are able to speak for the concerns of
others in English on MediaWiki or locally I encourage you to help your community
to be represented in this process.

If you can help translate the user interface for VisualEditor to your language,
you can help with that as well. Translatewiki has open tasks for translating
VisualEditor. A direct link to translate the user interface is here. You can see
how we are doing with those translations here. You need an account on
Translatewiki to translate. This account is free and easy to create.

If we can help your community in any way with this process, please let me know
and I will do my best to assist your Wikipedia with this |exciting development.
You can contact me on my meta talk page or by email. You can also contact
Patrick Earley for help with translations and documents on Mediawiki. We look
forward to working with you to bring the VisualEditor experience to your
Wikipedia! Keegan (WMF) (talk) 19:14, 30 Phupu 2013 (UTC)

Greetings. Starting on August 21 (tomorrow), all users with an account will be
using HTTPS to access Wikimedia sites. HTTPS brings better security and improves
your privacy. More information is available at m:HTTPS.

If HTTPS causes problems for you, tell us on bugzilla, on IRC (in the
#wikimedia-operations channel) or on meta. If you can't use the other methods,
you can also send an e-mail to https@wikimedia.org.

Greg Grossmeier (via the Global message delivery system). 19:42, 20 Phato 2013
(UTC) (wrong page? You can fix it.)

Notifications will inform users about new activity that affects them on this
wiki in a unified way: for example, this new tool will let you know when you
have new talk page messages, edit reverts, mentions or links -- and is designed
to augment (rather than replace) the watchlist. The Wikimedia Foundation's
editor engagement team developed this tool (code-named 'Echo') earlier this
year, to help users contribute more productively to MediaWiki projects.

We're now getting ready to bring Notifications to almost all other Wikimedia
sites, and are aiming for a 22 October deployment, as outlined in this release
plan. It is important that notifications is translated for all of the languages
we serve.

Please let us know if you have any questions, suggestions or comments about this
new tool. For more information, visit this project hub and this help page.
Keegan (WMF) (talk) 19:15, 4 Mphalane 2013 (UTC)

VisualEditor is coming to this project on December 2, 2013. VisualEditor is
software in development to allow people to edit pages in MediaWiki without
needing to learn wikitext syntax (like typing [[ to start a link). It is already
available and in use on some Wikipedia projects. Please see
mw:Help:VisualEditor/FAQ for more information.

When this software arrives, you will have the option to use it or to use the
current wikitext editor. When you press ‚Äúedit‚Äù, you will get the new
VisualEditor software. To use the wikitext editor, you can press ‚Äúedit source‚Äù.
For more information about how to use VisualEditor, see
mw:Help:VisualEditor/User guide.

We hope that this software will be useful to people in your community, and we
can really use your help to make it better! Please let us know if you find any
problems. If you're willing and able, please report the issue in bugzilla in the
"VisualEditor" product. If you would prefer not, please explain the issue you
found on the central feedback page on mediawiki.org. Once VisualEditor is made
available, if there are any urgent problems, like an unexpected bug suddenly
causing widespread severe problems, please e-mail James Forrester, the Product
Manager, at jforrester@wikimedia.org for immediate attention.

We would also appreciate help with translation with the pages about VisualEditor
here and on MediaWiki.org, and its user interface. To translate the user
interface, start by creating an account at TranslateWiki. Once your account
request is approved, all you need to do is select your language from this list.
This will give you a list of individual lines and paragraphs. The English
original will be on one side, with the option to ‚Äúedit‚Äù on the other. Pressing
‚Äúedit‚Äù will open an edit window where you can work.

The User Guide is another important document. To translate this, simply go to
the MediaWiki.org page, and select ‚Äútranslate this page‚Äù. Your language should
be available from the drop-down menu on the right. If you want to help with
translations and would like to talk about how, please leave a message for me on
my talk page.

Thank you, and happy editing! --Mdennis (WMF) (talk) 19:28, 19 Pudungwana 2013
(UTC)

I apologize for this message being only in English. Please translate it if
needed to help your community.

The Wikimedia Foundation's multimedia team seeks community guidance on a
proposal to support the MP4 video format. This digital video standard is used
widely around the world to record, edit and watch videos on mobile phones,
desktop computers and home video devices. It is also known as H.264/MPEG-4 or
AVC.

You are also welcome to join tomorrow's Office hours chat on IRC, this Thursday,
January 16, at 19:00 UTC, if you would like to discuss this project with our
team and other community members.

We look forward to a constructive discussion with you, so we can make a more
informed decision together on this important topic. Keegan (WMF) (talk) 06:47,
16 Pherekgong 2014 (UTC)

The Catalan-speaking world... Want to find out more? From March 16 to April 15
we will organise the Catalan Culture Challenge, a Wikipedia editing contest in
which victory will go to those who start and improve the greatest number of
articles about 50 key figures of Catalan culture. You can take part by creating
or expanding articles on these people in your native language (or any other one
you speak). It would be lovely to have you on board.¬†:-)

Hello. A new policy regarding the removal of "advanced rights" (administrator,
bureaucrat, etc) was recently adopted by global community consensus (your
community received a notice about the discussion). According to this policy, the
stewards are reviewing administrators' activity on smaller wikis. To the best of
our knowledge, your wiki does not have a formal process for removing "advanced
rights" from inactive accounts. This means that the stewards will take care of
this according to the new admin activity review here.

We have determined that the following users meet the inactivity criteria (no
edits and no log actions for more than 2 years):

However, if you as a community would like to create your own activity review
process superseding the global one, want to make another decision about these
inactive rights holders, or already have a policy that we missed, then please
notify the stewards on Meta-Wiki so that we know not to proceed with the rights
review on your wiki. Thanks, Rschen7754 21:47, 7 Mmesa 2014 (UTC)

There is a current discussion on German Wikipedia on a decision of Asaf Bartov,
Head of WMF Grants and Global South Partnerships, Wikimedia Foundation, who
rejected a request for funding a proposal from wikipedians from eowiki one year
ago with the explanation the existence, cultivation, and growth of the Esperanto
Wikipedia does not advance our educational mission. No one needs free knowledge
in Esperanto. On meta there has also started a discussion about that decision.
--Holder (talk) 10:55, 5 Motsheanong 2014 (UTC)

Hello and sorry for writing in English. Can anyone help me translate a small
article (2 paragraphs) from English to your language and create the article in
your wiki? Please, fell free to answer in my talk page in your wiki anytime.
Thanks! Xaris333 (talk) 02:38, 13 Phato 2014 (UTC)

Greetings! The Individual Engagement Grants program is accepting proposals for
funding new experiments from September 1st to 30th. Your idea could improve
Wikimedia projects with a new tool or gadget, a better process to support
community-building on your wiki, research on an important issue, or something
else we haven't thought of yet. Whether you need $200 or $30,000 USD, Individual
Engagement Grants can cover your own project development time in addition to
hiring others to help you.

Hello, Dear wikipedians. I invite you to edit and improve this article and to
add information about your and other country.--Kaiyr (talk) 13:34, 31 Mphalane
2014 (UTC)

(Sorry for the English - please translate this message!) MediaWiki message
delivery (talk) 20:02, 4 Hlakubele 2015 (UTC)

Hello, I made a proposal on Meta to change the rules for the steward
confirmations. Currently consensus to remove is required for a steward to lose
his status, however I think it's fairer to the community if every steward needed
the consensus to keep. As this is an issue that affects all WMF wikis, I'm
sending this notification to let people know & be able to participate. Best
regards, --MF-W 16:12, 10 Mmesa 2015 (UTC)

I am completely aware about bot policy. plese help by supporting here.-‡§¨‡•á‡§®‡•Å‡§™‡§∞‡§æ‡§ú
‡§™‡•å‡§°‡•á‡§≤ (talk) 02:16, 11 Mmesa 2015 (UTC)

This is a message from the 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee.
Translations are available.

I am pleased to announce that nominations are now being accepted for the 2015
Wikimedia Foundation Elections. This year the Board and the FDC Staff are
looking for a diverse set of candidates from regions and projects that are
traditionally under-represented on the board and in the movement as well as
candidates with experience in technology, product or finance. To this end they
have published letters describing what they think is needed and, recognizing
that those who know the community the best are the community themselves, the
election committee is accepting nominations for community members you think
should run and will reach out to those nominated to provide them with
information about the job and the election process.

Board of Trustees The Board of Trustees is the decision-making body that is
ultimately responsible for the long term sustainability of the Foundation, so we
value wide input into its selection. There are three positions being filled.
More information about this role can be found at the board elections page.

Funds Dissemination Committee (FDC) The Funds Dissemination Committee (FDC)
makes recommendations about how to allocate Wikimedia movement funds to eligible
entities. There are five positions being filled. More information about this
role can be found at the FDC elections page.

Funds Dissemination Committee (FDC) Ombud The FDC Ombud receives complaints and
feedback about the FDC process, investigates complaints at the request of the
Board of Trustees, and summarizes the investigations and feedback for the Board
of Trustees on an annual basis. One position is being filled. More information
about this role can be found at the FDC Ombudsperson elections page.

The candidacy submission phase lasts from 00:00 UTC April 20 to 23:59 UTC May 5
for the Board and from 00:00 UTCApril 20 to 23:59 UTC April 30 for the FDC and
FDC Ombudsperson. This year, we are accepting both self-nominations and
nominations of others. More information on this election and the nomination
process can be found on the 2015 Wikimedia elections page on Meta-Wiki.

On behalf of the Elections Committee, -Gregory Varnum (User:Varnent)
Coordinator, 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee

Posted by the MediaWiki message delivery on behalf of the 2015 Wikimedia
Foundation Elections Committee, 05:03, 21 April 2015 (UTC) ‚Ä¢ Translate ‚Ä¢ Get
help

This is a message from the 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee.
Translations are available.

Voting has begun for eligible voters in the 2015 elections for the Funds
Dissemination Committee (FDC) and FDC Ombudsperson. Questions and discussion
with the candidates for the Funds Dissemination Committee (FDC) and FDC
Ombudsperson will continue during the voting. Nominations for the Board of
Trustees will be accepted until 23:59 UTC May 5.

The Funds Dissemination Committee (FDC) makes recommendations about how to
allocate Wikimedia movement funds to eligible entities. There are five positions
on the committee being filled.

The FDC Ombudsperson receives complaints and feedback about the FDC process,
investigates complaints at the request of the Board of Trustees, and summarizes
the investigations and feedback for the Board of Trustees on an annual basis.
One position is being filled.

The voting phase lasts from 00:00 UTC May 3 to 23:59 UTC May 10. Click here to
vote. Questions and discussion with the candidates will continue during that
time. Click here to ask the FDC candidates a question. Click here to ask the FDC
Ombudsperson candidates a question. More information on the candidates and the
elections can be found on the 2015 FDC election page, the 2015 FDC Ombudsperson
election page, and the 2015 Board election page on Meta-Wiki.

On behalf of the Elections Committee, -Gregory Varnum (User:Varnent) Volunteer
Coordinator, 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee

Posted by the MediaWiki message delivery 03:45, 4 May 2015 (UTC) ‚Ä¢ Translate ‚Ä¢
Get help

This is a message from the 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee.
Translations are available.

Voting has begun for eligible voters in the 2015 elections for the Wikimedia
Foundation Board of Trustees. Questions and discussion with the candidates for
the Board will continue during the voting.

The Wikimedia Foundation Board of Trustees is the ultimate governing authority
of the Wikimedia Foundation, a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization registered in
the United States. The Wikimedia Foundation manages many diverse projects such
as Wikipedia and Commons.

The voting phase lasts from 00:00 UTC May 17 to 23:59 UTC May 31. Click here to
vote. More information on the candidates and the elections can be found on the
2015 Board election page on Meta-Wiki.

On behalf of the Elections Committee, -Gregory Varnum (User:Varnent) Volunteer
Coordinator, 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee

Posted by the MediaWiki message delivery 17:20, 17 May 2015 (UTC) ‚Ä¢ Translate ‚Ä¢
Get help

This is a message from the 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee.
Translations are available.

Voting has begun for eligible voters in the 2015 elections for the Wikimedia
Foundation Board of Trustees. Questions and discussion with the candidates for
the Board will continue during the voting.

The Wikimedia Foundation Board of Trustees is the ultimate governing authority
of the Wikimedia Foundation, a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization registered in
the United States. The Wikimedia Foundation manages many diverse projects such
as Wikipedia and Commons.

The voting phase lasts from 00:00 UTC May 17 to 23:59 UTC May 31. Click here to
vote. More information on the candidates and the elections can be found on the
2015 Board election page on Meta-Wiki.

On behalf of the Elections Committee, -Gregory Varnum (User:Varnent) Volunteer
Coordinator, 2015 Wikimedia Foundation Elections Committee

Posted by the MediaWiki message delivery 17:20, 17 May 2015 (UTC) ‚Ä¢ Translate ‚Ä¢
Get help

There are currently 0 administrators on the Sesotho Wikipedia. A list can be
found here.

My apologies for posting this message in English. Please help translate it if
you can.

The Wikimedia Foundation would like your feedback about how we can reimagine
Wikimedia Foundation grants, to better support people and ideas in your
Wikimedia project. Ways to participate:

(Opt-out Instructions) This message was sent by I JethroBT (WMF) through
MediaWiki message delivery. 23:09, 18 Phato 2015 (UTC)

Please help translate the statements on Meta Wiki. You can read more on the
Wikimedia blog.

My apologies for posting this message in English. Please help translate it if
you can.

Greetings! The Individual Engagement Grants program is accepting proposals until
September 29th to fund new tools, community-building processes, and other
experimental ideas that enhance the work of Wikimedia volunteers. Whether you
need a small or large amount of funds (up to $30,000 USD), Individual Engagement
Grants can support you and your team‚Äôs project development time in addition to
project expenses such as materials, travel, and rental space.

I JethroBT (WMF), Community Resources, Wikimedia Foundation. 20:53, 4 Lwetse
2015 (UTC)

(Opt-out Instructions) This message was sent by I JethroBT (WMF) (talk) through
MediaWiki message delivery.

There is still one week left to submit Individual Engagement Grant (IEG)
proposals before the September 29th deadline. If you have ideas for new tools,
community-building processes, and other experimental projects that enhance the
work of Wikimedia volunteers, start your proposal today! Please encourage others
who have great ideas to apply as well. Support is available if you want help
turning your idea into a grant request.

There is still one week left to submit Individual Engagement Grant (IEG)
proposals before the September 29th deadline. If you have ideas for new tools,
community-building processes, and other experimental projects that enhance the
work of Wikimedia volunteers, start your proposal today! Please encourage others
who have great ideas to apply as well. Support is available if you want help
turning your idea into a grant request.

Last month, we asked for community feedback on a proposal to change the
structure of WMF grant programs. Thanks to the 200+ people who participated! A
report on what we learned and changed based on this consultation is now
available.

Come read about the findings and next steps as WMF‚Äôs Community Resources team
begins to implement changes based on your feedback. Your questions and comments
are welcome on the outcomes discussion page.

The Community Advocacy team the Wikimedia Foundation has opened a consultation
on the topic of harassment on Meta. The consultation period is intended to run
for one month from today, November 16, and end on December 17. Please share your
thoughts there on harassment-related issues facing our communities and potential
solutions. (Note: this consultation is not intended to evaluate specific cases
of harassment, but rather to discuss the problem of harassment itself.)

This is a message regarding the proposed 2015 Free Bassel banner. Translations
are available.

This is to inform all Wikimedia contributors that a straw poll seeking your
involvement has just been started on Meta-Wiki.

As some of your might be aware, a small group of Wikimedia volunteers have
proposed a banner campaign informing Wikipedia readers about the urgent
situation of our fellow Wikipedian, open source software developer and Creative
Commons activist, Bassel Khartabil. An exemplary banner and an explanatory page
have now been prepared, and translated into about half a dozen languages by
volunteer translators.

We are seeking your involvement to decide if the global Wikimedia community
approves starting a banner campaign asking Wikipedia readers to call on the
Syrian government to release Bassel from prison. We understand that a campaign
like this would be unprecedented in Wikipedia's history, which is why we're
seeking the widest possible consensus among the community.

Given Bassel's urgent situation and the resulting tight schedule, we ask
everyone to get involved with the poll and the discussion to the widest possible
extent, and to promote it among your communities as soon as possible.

(Apologies for writing in English; please kindly translate this message into
your own language.)

Posted by the MediaWiki message delivery 21:47, 25 November 2015 (UTC) ‚Ä¢
Translate ‚Ä¢ Get help

Patrick Earley (WMF) via MediaWiki message delivery (talk) 01:49, 5 Pherekgong
2016 (UTC)

Your input is welcome (and greatly desired) at the Meta discussion, 2016
Strategy/Community consultation.

Apologies for English, where this is posted on a non-English project. We thought
it was more important to get the consultation translated as much as possible,
and good headway has been made there in some languages. There is still much to
do, however! We created m:2016 Strategy/Translations to try to help coordinate
what needs translation and what progress is being made.¬†:)

I hope you'll join us! Maggie Dennis via MediaWiki message delivery (talk)
19:06, 18 Pherekgong 2016 (UTC)

Greetings! The Individual Engagement Grants (IEG) program is accepting proposals
until April 12th to fund new tools, research, outreach efforts, and other
experiments that enhance the work of Wikimedia volunteers. Whether you need a
small or large amount of funds (up to $30,000 USD), IEGs can support you and
your team‚Äôs project development time in addition to project expenses such as
materials, travel, and rental space.

Hello, after six weeks of community discussion about Wikipedia to the Moon,
there are now 10 different proposals for content for the mission. Starting
today, you can vote for them on Meta-Wiki, and decide what we will work on: a
Wikipedia canon, different lists, the Moon in 300 languages, an astronomy
editathon, featured articles, articles about technology, endangered things, or
DNA-related topics. You can even vote against community involvement. Voting is
open until 24 June. Sorry that this message is again in English only, but we are
using village pumps to reach as many communities as possible, so that everyone
knows they can vote. Best, Moon team at Wikimedia Deutschland 15:31, 10 Phupjane
2016 (UTC)

You may already have heard about Wikipedia to the Moon: A team of scientists
called the ‚ÄúPT Scientists‚Äù are going to send a space craft to the moon in 2017
and they want to take Wikipedia along with them. Because Wikipedia is so big, we
cannot send all of it to the moon. That is why the international
Wikipedia-community has voted to send all ‚ÄúFeatured Articles and Featured Lists‚Äú
from all languages in Wikipedia.

‚ÄúFeatured Articles‚Äú is a category in many language versions of Wikipedia that
collects the very best articles in that language. Your community does not
currently have a ‚ÄûFeatured Articles‚Äú category. Ideally, we want to take every
language on Wikipedia to the moon and we also want to take the best articles in
your language. That is why we would like you to tell us what the very best
articles in your language are.

I am completely aware about bot policy. plese help by supporting here. -‡§∞‡§æ‡§ú‡§æ
‡§â‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡•á‡§§‡•Ä (talk) 02:23, 27 Lwetse 2016 (UTC)

Greetings! The Project Grants program is currently accepting proposals for
funding. There is just over a week left to submit before the October 11
deadline. If you have ideas for software, offline outreach, research, online
community organizing, or other projects that enhance the work of Wikimedia
volunteers, start your proposal today! Please encourage others who have great
ideas to apply as well. Support is available if you want help turning your idea
into a grant request.

Hello! I'm writing from the Wikimedia Foundation to invite you to give your
feedback on a proposed move from CC BY-SA 3.0 to a CC BY-SA 4.0 license across
all Wikimedia projects. The consultation will run from October 5 to November 8,
and we hope to receive a wide range of viewpoints and opinions. Please, if you
are interested, take part in the discussion on Meta-Wiki.

Apologies that this message is only in English. This message can be read and
translated in more languages here. Joe Sutherland (talk) 01:34, 6 Mphalane 2016
(UTC)

I apologise that this message is in English.
‚ßºCentralnotice-shared-help-translate‚ßΩ

Select strong passwords ‚Äì eight or more characters long, and containing letters,
numbers, and punctuation. Joe Sutherland (talk) / MediaWiki message delivery
(talk) 00:00, 14 Pudungwana 2016 (UTC)

Please accept my apologies - that first line should read "Help with
translations!". Joe Sutherland (WMF) (talk) / MediaWiki message delivery (talk)
00:11, 14 Pudungwana 2016 (UTC)

James Forrester (Product Manager, Editing department, Wikimedia Foundation)
--19:32, 14 Tshitwe 2016 (UTC)



https://st.wikipedia.org/wiki/Izikhothane

Izikhothane (Skhothane kapa UkuKhothana) ke lebitso la SiZula la dihlopha tsa
batho ka tlwaetseng ho tholahala makeisheng a Afrika Borwa, bao ba ratang ho
eponahatsa ka ditjhelete kapa ho ba barui papisong le batho babang. Dihlopha
tsena di phehisana ka metantso ya tsona pakang tsa batho babangata hore hotle ho
kgethwe hore ke sehlopha sefe seo e leng barui, kapa ke mang eo eleng morui
pakeng tsa bona. Diphihisano tsena tsa Dikhothane, di etsaha ha ngata mafung,
diphating, mme ho sebediswa difonofono tsa letheka, tjhelete, diaparo tsa theko
e hodimo, jwala le dikoloi tsa mabai-bai. Mohlodi o kgethwa kaho e ponahatsa
hore yena o senya thepa yahae e nang le boleng ba theko e hodimo, ka ho
iponahatsa hoke ha ena boleng hoyena, babang ba tshesa le tjhelete, dieta,
difonofono tsa letheka, le diaparo tsa theko e hodimo haholo. Hore obe mohlodi o
tshwanetse o hlahise thepa ya theko e hodimo o e tjhese hore o bontshe hore o
morui ya nang le tjhelete e ngata. Diphihisano tsena di tswela pele hobe ho
fihlela ho eba le mohlodi ya bontshang hore o nale thepa ya theko e hodimo eo a
sa e hlokeng.

Lebitso lena leo ho thweng ke Izikhothane, ke lebitso la Sizulu le kopanyang
mabitso a mabedi a bitswang Izikhotha (Ho latswa) le Ukukhothana (ho soma).
Lebitso lena ke le seleng se sebediswang makeisheneng ho supa ya nang le thepa
ya theko e hodimo, kappa ya nang le diaparo tse turu. Ho latswa ho tshwanswa le
ho latswa ha menwana ya motho e mong hore a kgone ho tswella pele ho bala
tjhelete. Tshebediso ya holatswa ke sebediswa haho latswa ‚ÄúDesert Custart‚Äù ka
menwana, ho bontsha hore motho o nale tlhelete e ngata. Tseo ba di etsa hangata
ditlhodisanong tsa bona.

Izihkothane, tlhaho ya teng e qadile ka dilemo tsa bo 2000 makeisheneng a Afrika
Borwa haholo Soweto le Diepsloot. Tlhodisano ena ha yaka ya lemowa ho fihlela ka
selemo sa 2011 le 2012, moo e ileng ya thola matla a manyata ya bay a tsibiwa ke
batho ba bangata. Papadi engwe e ne e leteng ka dilemo tsa 1950, moo basebetsi
ba tswang mafatsheng a mang, baneng ba hlodisana ka disutu tsa bong phehisanong
eneng e bitswa uSwenka dimaeneng Gauteng. Bahlodisane bane ba hloka ka ho
itholla tjhelete, disebediswa tsa ntlong, mehlape eo ba e romellang hae malapeng
a bona.

Hore otle o bitswe Sekhothane, o tshwanetse hore o iponahatse ka diaparo tse
majabajaba tsa theko e turu. Izikhothane tseka di reka thepa tse pedi tsa
diaparo tse tshwanang, mee difapane ka mmala, mohlala ke ho reka dieta tse
tshwanang ka mmala o sa tshwaneng. Ebe he, base ba apara dieta tseo tse sa
tshwaneng ka mmala. Se seng sa dieta kappa diaparo tseo tse tshwanang di tla
tjheswa ho bontsha bokgoni ke hoba le tjhelete e ngata. Tse ding tsa mahlale a
etswang ke dikhothane, ke ho apara diaparo tse nang le matlalo a mangata, ebe
he, letlalo ka leng le a tjheswa ele ho bontsha hore motho onale tjhelete e
ngata. Ha diaparo dise di rekihwe, di ‚Äúprice tags‚Äù diatlohelwa hore bahlodisane
ba bone hore thepa e rekiwe ka bokae.

Hore motho a kgone ho kenella phadisano ya izikhothane, o tshwanetse ke hore a
reke diaparo, dieta, thepa e theko e hodimo haholo. Diaparo tseo di tshwanetse
hore dibe le mmala o phahameng haholo, ebe diaparo tsa mabitso a hodimo. Ha
motho a enale diaparo tsa theko e hodimo, o eba le menyetla ya ho hlola
phadisanong. Bahlodisane ba bitsana hoya ka moo e mong a apereng ka teng, ebe
tlhodisano eya qala hoya ka theko ya diaparo. Bahlodisane bana, bat la tentsha
bantse ba bontshana dithepa tsa bona, ebe balebedi kappa leqhubu la batho
(matshwele) eba bona bao ka kgethang hore ke mang mohlodi. Hore o hlole
phehisano, sekhothane setswanetse hore re tjhese thepa kapa ho tabola tjhelete,
ho qhala jwala ba theko e hodimo, bathube kapa ho kenya difonofono tsa letheka
metsing, ho bontsha matshwele hore yena onale bokgoni. Letshwele e tlaba lona le
kgethang mohlodi. Letshwele e tlaba lona le kgethang mohlodi hoya ka moo a
bontshitseng hore onale tjhelete e kae kaho tlepetsa thepa eo a nang le yona ya
theko e hodimo.

Batjha bao ba bitswang izikhothane, ba papiswa jwalo ka batho bao ba hlokang
tsebo ka ditjhelete le melemo ya yona, ba senang tjhebelo pele ya bokamoso, ba
ratang thepa ja majabajaba e tshwarehang, mme ba rata botumo haholo. Setso sa
dikhothane ke sa batho bao ba ratang ho iponahatsa hore bona ha batswe malapeng
a futsanehileng moo tlala le bofutsanehi bo seyong. Bonnete ele hore bofumanehi
ke hona moo bo leng teng kalebaka la tjhelete eo batho ba e fumanang mesebetsing
ya bona.



https://st.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marabi_(Bohlanyantja)

Marabi ke bolwetse bo bakwang ke vaerase e bakang ho ruruha ha boko bathong le
ho tse ding tsa diphoofolo tse madi a futhumetseng. Matshwao a ho kula a bang
teng pele a kenyeletsa feberu le ho hlohlona sebakeng se amehileng. Matshwao ana
a ho kula a latelwa ke le le leng kapa a fetang bonngwe a matshwao a latelang a
ho kula: ho thothomela ho sa laoleheng, ho thaba ho fetang tekano, ho tshaba
metsi, ho se kgone ho tsamaisa ditho tsa mmele, pherekano le ho lahlehelwa ke
kelello. Kamora hore matshwao a ho kula a hlahe, marabi hangata a qetella ka
lefu. Nako e mahareng a ho tshwaetswa ke bolwetse le ho iponahatsa ha matshwao a
ho kula ka tlwaelo ke kgwedi ho isa dikgweding tse tharo. Leha ho le jwalo, nako
ena e ka fapafapana ho tloha bonyane bekeng e le nngwe ho isa ho nako e fetang
selemo se le seng. Nako e itshetlehile hodima sebaka seo vaerase e tlamehang ho
se tsamaya ho fihla bokong.

Marabi a fetisetswa bathong ho tswa diphoofolong tse ding. Marabi a ka fetiswa
ha phoofolo e tshwaeditsweng e ngwapa kapa e loma phoofolo e nngwe kapa motho.
Mathe a phoofolo e tshwaeditsweng a kanna a fetisa marabi haeba a ka ama lera le
ka nkong ya phoofolo e nngwe kapa motho. Boholo ba diketsahalo tsa marabi
bathong bo bakwa ke ho longwa ke dintja. Diketsahalo tse fetang 99% tsa marabi
dinaheng tseo hangata dintja di nang le marabi di bakwa ke ho longwa ke dintja.
Dinaheng tsa Amerika Leboya le America Borwa, ho longwa ke bomankgane ke sesosa
se tlwaelehileng sa tshwaetso ya marabi bathong, mme ho ka tlase ho 5% ke
diketsahalo tsa ho longwa ke dintja. Ke ka sewelo diroto di tshwaetswang ke
marabi. Vaerase ya marabi e mathela bokong ho latela methapokutlo. Bolwetse bo
ka hlahlojwa kamora ho qala ha matshwao a ho kula.

Mananeo a taolo le ho entwa ha diphoofolo a fokoditse kotsi ya marabi a hlahang
dintjeng mabatoweng a mangata lefatsheng. Ho tshetlela ha batho pele ba pepeswa
bolwetseng ba marabi ho a kgothaletswa ho thibela ho ba kotsing e kgolo.
Sehlopha se kotsing e kgolo se kenyeleditse batho ba sebetsanang le bomankgane
kapa ba qetang nako e telele dibakeng tsa lefatshe moo bolwetse ba marabi bo
leng bongata. Bathong ba bileng pepesong ya bolwetse ba marabi, ente ya marabi
ka nako e nngwe le mmunoglobulin ya marabi di sebetsa ka ho phethahala ho
thibela bolwetse ha motho a fumane kalafo pele matshwao a ho kula a marabi a
qala. Ho hlatswa ho longwa le mengwapo nako ya metsotso e 15 ka sesepa le metsi,
povidone iodine, kapa sesebediswa sa ho hlwekisa se ka bolayang vaerase le sona
se bonahala se ka sebetsa ka ho phethahala ho thibeleng phetiso ya marabi. Ke
batho ba seng ba kae ba phonyohileng tshwaetsong ya marabi kamora ho ba le
matshwao a ho kula. Bana e ne e le ba bileng kalafo e matla e tsejwnag ka hore
ke Milwaukee protocol.

Ente ya marabi ke ente e sebedisetswang ho thibela marabi. Ho na le palo e
fumanehang ya diente tse bolokehileng tse bileng di sebetsa ka ho phethahala. Di
ka sebediswa ho thibela marabi pele ho nako le kamora nako ya ho ba pepesong ya
vaerase e jwaloka ho longwa ke ntja kapa mankgane. Ho tshetlela ho etsahalang ho
ba nako e telele kamora tekanyetso tse tharo. Ha ngata di fumantshwa ka ho
hlajwa ka injekshene letlalong kapa mosifeng. Kamora ho pepeswa bolwetseng ente
hantlentle e lokela ho sebediswa mmoho le immunoglobulin ya marabi. Ho
kgothaletswa hore batho ba kotsing e kgolo ya pepeso ba entwe pele ho pepeso e
ka bang teng. Diente di sebetsa ka ho phethahala bathong le diphoofolong tse
ding. Ho setlela ha dintja ho phethahetse hantle ho thibela bolwetse bathong.

Dimilione tsa batho lefatshe ka bophara di se di entilwe mme ho akangwa hore
hona ho sireleditse batho ba fetang 250,000 ka selemo. Di ka sebediswa ka
polokeho dihlopheng tsa batho ba dilemo tse fapaneng. Ho ka etsang diphesente
tse 35 ho isa ho tse 45 tsa batho ba ba le nako e kgutshwane ya ho tlerefala le
bohloko sebakeng se hlabilweng. Ho ka etsang diphesente tse 5 ho isa ho tse 15
tsa batho ba kanna ba ba le [[]]feberuho opelwa ke hlooho, kapa ho nyokgoloha.
Kamora ho pepesetswa bolwetseng ba marabi ha ho na kganyetsano ho e sebediseng.
Boholo ba diente ha di na thimerosal. Diente tse entsweng ka sekotwana sa
mothapokutlo di sebediswa dinaheng tse mmalwa, haholoholo Asia le dinaheng tsa
Latin Amerika, empa ha di hlile ha di sebetse ka ho phethahala ebile di na le
ditlamorao tse kgolo. Kahoo tshebediso ya tsona ha e kgothaletswe ke Mokgatlo wa
Lefatshe wa Bophelo bo Botle.

Ditjeho tsa ho di reka holeseileng di mahareng a Didolara tsa Amerika tse 44 le
78 bakeng sa kalafo e phetwaphetwang ho tloha ka 2014. Dinaheng tse Kopaneng tsa
Amerika kalafo e phetwaphethwang ya ente ya marabi e feta Didolara tsa Amerika
tse 750.

Marabi a baka mafu a ka bang 26,000 ho isa ho 55,000 lefatshe ka bophara selemo
le selemo. Ho fetang 95% ya mafu ana a etsahala Asia le Afrika. Marabi e
fumaneha dinaheng tse fetang 150 dikontinenteng tsohle ntle le Antatika. Ho
fetang dibilione tse 3 tsa batho ba phela mabatoweng a lefatshe moo marabi e
fumanehang. Boholong ba Yuropa le Ostralia, marabi a fumanwa ho bomankgane.
Ditjhaba tsa dihlekehleke tse nnyane di hloka marabi ho hang.



https://st.wikipedia.org/wiki/Feberu_ya_Zika

Feberu ya Zika (e tsejwang hape ele bolwetse ba vaerase ya Zika) ke bolwetse bo
bakwang ke vaerase ya Zika.Boholong ba nako ha ho na matshwao a ho kula, empa ha
a le teng a ba bobebe mme a kanna a tshwana le feberu ya dengue.Matshwao a ho
kula a ka kenyeletsa feberu, ho tlerefala ha mahlo, manonyeletso a bohloko,
hloho e opang, le lekgopo .Matshwao a ho kula ka kakaretso a ba teng nako e ka
tlase ho matstsi a supileng. Ha ho so be le tlaleho efe kapa efe ya lefu nakong
ya tshwaetso ya pele.Tshwaetso e amahantswe le sehlopha sa matshwao a ho kula a
hlahang mmoho a Guillain‚ÄìBarr√© (GBS).

Feberu ya Zika e atiswa haholoholo ke ho longwa ke menwang ya mofuta wa
Aedes.Hape e kanna ya ba ho fetiswa ka thobalano ho tloha ho monna ho ya ho
balekane ba hae ba thobalano mme e na le kgoneho ya ho atiswa ke phumantsho ya
madi. Tshwaetso basading ba immeng e kanna ya tshwaetsa le ngwana mme e
amahantshwa le ho senyehelwa le ho se itekanele kelellong ha bana[[]]. Tlhahlobo
ya ho kula e etswa ka teko mading, morotong, kapa matheng bakeng sa boteng ba
vaerase ya Zika RNA ha motho a kula.

Thibelo e kenyeletsa phokotso ya ho longwa ke menwang dibakeng tseo bolwetse bo
hlahang teng le ho sebedisa dikhondomo ka tsela e napahetseng. Malebaleba a ho
thibela ho longwa a kenyeletsa le tshebediso ya sephokadikokonyana, ho kwahela
mmele ohle ka diaparo, dinete tsa monwang, le ho kata diqanthane tseo menwang e
behelang ho tsona. Ha ho ente e phethahetseng. Bahlanka ba bophelo bo botle ba
kgothaleditse hore basadi ba dibakeng tse anngweng ke sewa sa Zika ka 2015-16 ba
nahane ho emisa ka ho ima le hore basadi ba immeng ba se etele dibaka tsena.
Leha ho so be le kalafo e ikgethang, paracetamol (acetaminophen) di ka nna tsa
thusa ka matshwao a ho kula. Ho amohelwa sepetlele ha se ka dinako tsohle ho
hlokahalang.

Vaerase e bakang bolwetse bona e ile ya fumanwa ka 1947. Sewa sa pele bathong se
ngotsweng se bile ka 2007 Dinaheng tsa Kopaneng tsa Micronesia. Template:Ho
tloha ka, bolwetse bo hlahile mabatoweng a mashome a mabedi a Amerika Leboya le
Amerika Borwa. Hape bo tsebahala ka ho iponahatsa Afrika, Asia le Phasifiki. Ka
lebaka la sewa se qadileng Brazil ka 2015, Mokgatlo wa Lefatshe wa Bophelo bo
Botle o ile wa phatlalatsa Ngongoreho ya Matjhaba ya Tshohanyetso ya Bophelo bo
Botle ba Setjhaba ka Hlakola 2016.



https://st.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schistosomiasis

Schistosomiasis, e tsejwang hape ele feberu ya kgofu, ke helminthiasis ke
bolwetse bo bakwang ke dintho tse pedi tse amanang eo e nngwe e leng senwamadi
se bitswangschistosome. Peipi ya moroto kapa ya mala e kanna ya ameha. Matshwao
le matshwao a ho kula a kanna a kenyeletsa mahlaba ka mpeng, letshollo, mantle a
madi, kapa moroto o madi. Ba tshwaeditsweng nako e telele ba kanna ba ba le ho
senyeha ha sebete, ho hloleha ho sebetsa hantle ha diphio, ho sitwa ho ima
kamora ho leka, kapa mofetshe wa senya. Baneng, e kanna ya baka ho hola ho
fokolang le bothata ba ho ithuta.

Bolwetse bo nama ka ho kena metsing a foreshe a nang le tshwaetso ya dinwamadi.
Dinwamadi tsena di hlahiswa ke dikgofu tsa metsi a foreshe tse tshwaeditsweng.
Bolwetse bo tlwaelehile haholo hara bana ba dinaha tse ntseng di tswela pele
kaha ho etsahala hangata hore ba bapalle metsing a tshwaeditsweng. Dihlopha tse
ding tse kotsing e kgolo di kenyeletsa balemi, batshwasi ba ditlhapi, le batho
ba sebedisang metsi a sa hlwekang letsatsi le leng le le leng.Bo fumanwa
sehlopheng sa tshwaetso ya dinonometsane.Tlhahlobo ya ho kula eka ba ka ho
fumana mahe a senwamadi morotong kapa mantleng a motho. Eka netefatswa hape ka
ho fumana dilwantshadikokwanahloko tse kgahlano le bolwetse mading.

Mekgwa ya ho thibela bolwetswe e kenyeletsa ntlafatso ya phumantsho ya metsi a
hlwekileng le ho fokotsa palo ya dikgofu. Dibakeng tseo bolwetse bo totileng,
moriana wa praziquantel ho kanna ha fanwa ka ona hang ka selemo sehlopheng
sohle. Hona ho etswa ho fokotsa palo ya batho ba tshwaeditsweng mme, ebe ho
latela, ho nama ha bolwetse. Praziquantel hape le yona ke kalafo e
kgothaletswang ke Mokgatlo wa Lefatshe wa Bophelo bo Botle (WHO) bakeng sa ba
tsejwang ba tshwaeditswe.

Schistosomiasis e amme ho ka bang dimilione tse 210 tsa batho lefatsheng ka
bophara. Ho ka etsang 12,000 ho isa ho 200,000 ya batho ba bolawa ke yona selemo
se seng le se seng. Bolwetse bona bo fumanwa haholo Afrika, mmoho le Asia le
Amerika Borwa. Ho ka etsang dimilione tse 700 tsa batho, dinaheng tse fetang 70,
ba phela dibakeng tseo bolwetse bo fumanehang haholo. Dinaheng tsa ditropiki,
schistosomiasis ke ya bobedi feela ho malaria hara malwetse a dinwamadi e nang
le sekgahla hodima kgolo ya moruo. Schistosomiasis e lenaneng la bolwetse ba
ditropikeng bo sa tsotellweng.



https://st.wikipedia.org/wiki/Onchocerciasis

Onchocerciasis, e tsejwang hape ele river blindness le bolwetse ba Robles, ke
bolwetse bo bakwang ke tshwaetso ya seboko sa senwamadi sa Onchocerca volvulus.
Matshwao a ho kula a kenyeleditse ho hlohlona ho mahlonoko, maqhutsu tlasa
letlalo, le bofofu. Ke sesosa sa bobedi se tlwaelehileng sa bofofu bo bakwang ke
tshwaetso, kamora trachoma.

Seboko sa senwamadi se atiswa ke ho longwa ke ntsintsi e ntsho ya mofuta wa
Simulium. Ka tlwaelo ho hlokahala hore e lome makgetlo a mangata pele tshwaetso
e etsahala. Dintsintsi tsena di phela haufi le dinoka, ke kahoo di rehilweng
lebitso lena. Hang ha di se di le mmeleng wa motho, diboko di bopa tshenyana e
tswelang ka ntle ho letlalo. Ebe di boela di tshwaetsa ntsintsi e ntsho e
boelang e loma motho. Ho na le ditsela tse ngata tsa ho hlahloba ho kula tse
kenyeleditseng: ho kenya sekotwana sa letlalo se ilo hlahlobuwa ka hare ho
mokedikedi wa metsi a letswai o tlwaelehileng mme ho shejwe ha tshenyane e tswa
sekotwaneng sa letlalo, ho sheba tshenyane ka hare ho leihlo, ho sheba ka hare
ho maqhutsu a tlasa letlalo bakeng sa diboko tse hodileng.

Kentelo kgahlanong le bolwetse ha e so be teng. Thibelo ke ka ho qoba ho longwa
ke dintsintsi. Hona ho ka kenyeletsa tshebediso ya sephokadikokonyana le ho
apara ka tshwanelo. Mawala a mang a kenyeletsa ho fokotswa ha sehlopha sa
dintsintsi ka ho fafatsa dibolayadikokonyana. Mawala a ho fedisa bolwetse ka ho
alafa dihlopha tsohle tsa batho habedi ka selemo e tswela pele ka ho se kgaotse
dibakeng tse mmalwa tsa lefatshe. Kalafo ya ba tshwaeditsweng e etswa ka moriana
wa ivermectin dikgweding tse ding le tse ding tse tsheletseng ho isa ho tse
leshome le metso e mmedi. Kalafo ena e bolaya tshenyana empa e seng seboko se
hodileng. Moriana wa doxycycline, o bolayang baktheria e amanang le mara a
arotseng disele a bitswang Wolbachia, o bonahala o fokodisa diboko mme o
kgothaletswa ke dingaka tse ding. Ho tloswa ha maqhutsu a tlasa letlalo ka
oporeishene ho kanna ha etswa.

Batho ba ka bang dimilione tse 17 ho isa ho tse 25 ba na le tshwaetso ya river
blindness, le kakanyo ya 0.8 ya milione e kannang ya lahlehelwa ke pono. Boholo
ba ditshwaetso di etsahala dinaheng tsa Afrika tse ka tlase ho lehwatata la
Sahara, leha ditlaleho di ile tsa etswa naheng ya Yemen le dibakeng tse seng kae
tsa Amerika Bohareng le Amerika Borwa. Ka 1915, ngaka Rodolfo Robles o ile a
amanya seboko pele le bolwetse ba mahlo. E lethathameng la Mokgatlo wa Lefatshe
wa Bophelo bo Botle jwaloka bolwetse ba ditropikeng bo sa tsotellweng.



https://st.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lepera

Lepera, le tsejwang hape ka hore ke bolwetse ba Hansen (HD), ke tshwaentso ya
nako e telele e bakuweng ke baktheria ya Mycobacterium leprae le Mycobacterium
lepromatosis. Ho tloha qalong, ditshwaetso ha di na matshwao a ho kula mme di
kanna tsa dula di le jwalo ho tloha dilemong tse 5 ho isa ho tse 20. Matshwao a
ho kula a hlahang a kenyeletsa ho ruruha ho honnyane ha bokantle ba methapo ya
boko/methapokutlo, peipi ya ho hema, letlalo, le mahlo. Ho qetella ka ho se
utlwe bohloko dithong tsa mmele mme hoo ho ka lebisa tahlehelong ya ditho tsa
mmele ka lebaka la ho tswa dikotsi kgafetsa kapa tshwaetso e bakwang ke maqeba a
sa elweng hloko. Bofokodi le kgaello ya pono di kanna tsa ba teng.

Lepara le nama mahareng a batho. Ho kgolwa hore le ka etsahala ka ho kgohlola
kapa ho ama lero le tswang nkong ya motho ya tshwaeditsweng. Lepera le hlaha
hangata hara batho ba futsanehileng mme ho dumelwa hore le ka fetiswa ka
marothodi a hlahang ho hemeng. Ho fapana le mohopolo o tlwaelehileng, ha le
tshwaetse haholo ka ho ama. Mefuta e mmedi ya sehlooho ya bolwetse bona e
itshetlehile palong e teng ya baktheria: paucibacillary (sehlotshwana se itseng
sa dibaktheria) le multibacillary (boiyane ba dibaktheria). Mefuta e e mmedi e
arolwa ka palo ya ya motswako wa mmala wa letlalo, palo ya ditlapedi tse
letlalong, e nang le dihlotshwana tse hlano kapa tse ka tlase le boiyane bo
fetang bohlano. Tlhahlobo ya ho kula e tiiswa ka ho etsa teko sekgohleleng ka
laboratoring sekotwaneng sa letlalo sa setho sa mmele kapa ho hlahloba DNA ho
sebediswa mokgwa o bitswang polymerase chain reaction.

Lepera le ka phekolwa ka kalafo e bitswang multidrug therapy (MDT). Kalafo
bakeng sa lepera la paucibacillary ke ka meriana ya dapsone le rifampicin nako
ya dikgwedi tse tsheletseng. Kalafo bakeng sa lepera la multibacillary ke ka
meriana ya rifampicin, dapsone, le dofazimine nako ya dikgwedi tse leshome le
metso e mmedi. Dikalafo tsena di fuwa mahala ke Mokgatlo wa Lefatshe wa Bophelo
bo Botle. Palo e nngwe ya dilwantshadikokwanahloko e kanna ya sebediswa.
Lefatshe ka bophara ka 2012, palo ya diketsahalo tsa lefu la nako e telele ya
lepera e ne e le 189,000 e theohile ho tloha ho dimilione tse 5.2 dilemong tsa
bo-1980. Palo ya diketsahalo tse ntjha e ne e le 230,000. Boholo ba diketsahalo
tse ntjha di etsahetse dinaheng tse 16, moo India e neng e na le palo e fetang
halofo ya palo e boletsweng. Dilemo tse 20 tse fetileng, dimilione tse 16 tsa
batho lefatshe ka bophara ba ile ba phekolwa lepera. Diketsahalo tse 200 di
tlalehwa Dinaheng tse Kopaneng tsa Amerika ka selemo.

Lepara le amme batho dilemo tse diketekete. Bolwetse bona bo fumane lebitso la
bona ho tswa ho Selatini lentswe lepra, le bolelang "lekgekgefa", ha lereo lena
"Hanse's disease" le reheletswe ngaka Gerhard Armauer Hansen. Ho kgetholla batho
le ho ba beha ditsheng tsa balepera ho ntse ho etsahala dibakeng tse jwaloka
India, China, le Afrika. Leha ho le jwalo, boholo ba ditsha di kwetswe haesale
ho hlokomelwa hore lepera ha le tshwaetse ka ho ama. Sekgobo sa lepera haesale
se le teng nalaneng ya ho phela ha batho, se tswela pele ho ba tshita ya ho
itlaleha le kalafo ya kapele. Batho ba bang ba nka lentswe 'lepera' e le tlhapa,
ba kgetha ho sebedisa polelo e reng "batho ba anngweng ke lepera". Letsatsi la
Lefatshe la Lepera le ne le qalwe ka 1954 ho etsa tlhokomediso ya batho ba
anngweng ke lepera.



https://st.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ebola

Kokwanahloko ya boloetse ba Ebola (EVD) kapa Feberu ya phallo ya madi ya Ebola
(EHF) ke boloetse ba batho bo bokwang ke kokwanahloko ya Ebola. Matshwao
hantlentle a qala matsatsi a mabedi ho isa ho a mararo ka mora ho tshwaetswa ke
kokwanahloko, feberu, mmetso o bohloko, mesifa e opang, le hlooho e opang.
Hantlentle ho nyekelwa ke pelo, ho hlatsa, le letshollo di a latela ho
tsamaisanang le phoketseho ya ho sebetsa ha sebete le diphio. Mothating ona,
batho ba itseng ba qalella ho ba le matha a ho tswa madi .

Kokwanahloko e fumanwa ka ho ama madi kapa ma lero la mmele a phoofolo e
tshwaeditsweng (haholoholo ditshwene kapa bommankgane ba difateng). Ho hasanngwa
ke moya ha ho so ka ho ngolwa ka hona tikolohong e tlwaelehileng. Ho kgolwa hore
bommankgane ba difateng ba fetisa le ho hasanya kokwanahloko ntle le hore bona
ba amehe ke yona. Hang ha tshwaetso bathong e ba teng, bohloko bo ka nama
mahareng a batho jwalo. Banna ba phonyohileng boloetseng bona ba kgona ho bo
fetistsa ka peo a bonna nakong e ka etsang dikgwedi tse pedi. Hantlentle, ele
hore ho hlahlobiswe maloetse a mang a nang le matshwao a jwaloka malaria,
kholera le dikokwanahloko tsa feberu ya phallo ya madi tse ding di qhelelwa ka
thoko sethatong. Ho netefatsa tlhahlobo ya disampole tsa madi di entswe diteko
tsa kokwanahloko dibolaya dikokwanahloko, dikokwanahloko RNA, kapa kokwanahloko
ka boyona.

Thibelo e kenyeleditse ho fokotsa ho hasanngwa ha boloetse ho tswa ditshweneng
le dikolobeng tse tshwaeditsweng ho ya bathong. Hona ho ka etswa ka ho hlahloba
tshwaetso diphoofolo tse jwalo ka ho di bolaya le ho lahla ditopo tsa tsona ka
tsela e nepahetseng haeba ho fumanwa di na le boloetse. Ho pheha nama ka ho
phethahala le ho apara diaporo tse sireletsang ha ho sebetswanwa le nama ho ka
ba le thuso, kaha ho apara diaparo tse sireletssang le ho hlapa matsoho ha re le
hara batho ba nang le boloetse. Disampole tsa maro le dikarolo tse tswang
bathong ba nang le boloetse di tshwanala ho tshwarwa ka tlhokomelo e
ikgethileng.

Ha ho kalafo e ikgethang bakeng sa boloetse; mawala a ho thusa batho ba
tshwaeditsweng a kenyeletsa ho fana ka kalafo ya ho ba nwesa metsi ka lehano
(metsi a tswekerenyana le letswainyana bakeng sa hore ba nwe) kapa ho kenya maro
ka methapo ya madi. Boloetse bo na le sekgahla se hodimo: hangata bo boloya
mahareng a 50% le 90% a ba nang le kokwanahloko. EVD e ile ya hlokomelwa Sudan
le Demoratic Republic of Congo. Boloetse bona hantlentle bo ropoha mabatoweng a
diteropiki tsa Afrika e Borwa ho Sahara. Ho tloha ka 1976 ( ha bo ne bo bonwa
lekgetlo la pele) ho fihla ka 2013, batho ba ka tlasenyana ho 1,000 ka selemo ba
bile le tshwaetso. Ho ropoha ho hoholohadi ho fihlela jwale ho tswelang pele ke
ho ropoha ha Ebola Afrika Bophirima ka 2014, ho amang Guinea, Sierra Leone,
Liberia le ho kannang ha etsahala Nigeria. Ho tloha ka Phato 2014 ditlaleho tse
fetang 1600 di se di ile tsa etswa. Mawala a ntse a tswelang pele a ho hlahisa
ente; leha ho le jwalo, ha ho so be le a atlehang.



