https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bouxcuengh

Bouxcuengh (Sawndip: 佈僮 Vahgun:壮族) dwg aen minzcuzvunznoix Cunghvaz Yinzminz
Gunghozgoz(Cungguek).Bouxcuengh dwg minzcuz vunz lai daih ngeih youq
Cungguek,dwg nga ndeu duh Bakvied ciuhgonq.Neix Bouxcuengh youq Gvangjsae,
Gvangjdoeng, Yinznanz, Guicouh lai.Bouxcuengh caeuq Bouxyaej,Bouxdaej Bouxnoengz
Giáy youq Yiednamz doxlumj,Caez heuh guh Bouxraeuz.

Sawndip dwg cungj saw ndeu bouxmo caeuq bouxciengqfwen gonq caux ok,ragoek
daengz Dangzciuz cien bi gonq.Miz sawloih sawndip gyoepsuenq,sawndip lwgminz
yungh gungh miz 4800 aen yiengh neix.Miz bonj saw duh
Soengqciuz(宋·范成大《桂海虞衡志》)naeuz:"Baihgyae fungsug rwix,raizsaw gauqguen mbawheiq
daengj saeh neix,gag yungh saw doj(Saw doj de naeuz cix dwg Sawjndip),Guiqlinz
gij gunh neix cungj lumj yiengh neix."(边远俗陋，牒诉券的，专用土俗书，桂林诸郡皆然。)

Cunghvaz Yinzminz Gunghozgoz laebbaenz gvaqlaeng,bi 1955 doenggvaq Fueng'an
Sawcuengh,youq dieg Cuengh doiqgvangj sawjyungh.Fueng'an nienzdaih 50 dwg yungh
sawmeh duh Sihlahfuh caeuq sawmeh duh gag guh.Nienzdaih 1980 gvaqlaeng,Sawcuengh
gag yungh 26 aen Sawmeh Lahdinh.



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vangz_Yenfanh

Vangz Yenfanh (Sawgun: 黄现璠; pinyin: Huáng Xiànfán）(1899 nienz 11 nyied 13 hauh —
1982 nienz 1 nyied 18 hauh）, Cunghgoz lisij yozgyah、minzcuz
yozgyah、gyauyuzgyah、sevei hozdunggyah.

Vangz Yenfanh, Mingzcoh nyuenz heuh Ganh Ginjyingh, dwg vunz Gvangjsih Fuzsuih
Yen Gizgiu Cin Mbanj Gizswh, Bouxcuengh. 1926 nienz haujhaeuj Baekging swhfan
Dayoz yigoh, youq hag 9 bi, bizyez le bae Yizbwnj Dunghgingh Digoz Dayoz
(seizneix dwg Dunghgingh Dayoz) yenzgiuyen louzhag.1937 nienz dauqma guek raeuz
le gonqlaeng dang Gvangjsih Dayoz、Cunghsanh Dayoz、guek laeb Gveilinz Swhfan
Yozyen、Gvangjsih Swhfan Yozyen (seizneix dwg Gvangjsih Swhfan Dayoz) daengj
yausijyoz gyausou gvaq,dwg Cungguek raeuz “boux gyausou daihhag Bouxcuengh
daih’it”. De gonqlaeng giem dang Gvangjsih Gyauyuz Yenzgiusoj
yenzgiuyenz、Gvangjsih Dayoz yindaujcangj、cunghvwnzhi cujyin、duzsuhgvanj
gvanjcangj、Gvangjsih Swhfan Yozyen duzsuhgvanj gvanjcangj daengj cizvu gvaq.
1949 nienz Cungguek moq laebbaenz le,Vangz Yenfanh laebdaeb ndaej senj guh gaiq
daih’it Daengxgoek Yinzminz Daibiuj Davei daibyauj、daengx guek yinzda minzcuz
veijyenzvei veijyenz、Cunghyangh doiq rog vwnzva lenzloz veijyenzvei veijyenz
caeuq gaiq daih vuj Cunghgoz Yinzminz Cwngci Hezsangh Veiyi veijyenz. Gonqlaeng
ndaej Cunghyangh Yinzminz Cwngfuj Cwngvuyen nyaemh dang Gveiqsae Bouxcuengh
Swcigih Yinzminz Cwngfuj veijyenz、Gvangjsih Swngj Yinzminz Veijyenzvei veijyenz.

Vangz Yenfanh gij cungyau gungyen gwnz yozsuz biujyienh youq de boux daih’it
haicaux le fungheiq ndei Cuenghhag yenzgiu,cauxlaeb le gwnz lizsij minzcuz
Cungguek aen saujsu minzcuz yozbaij daih’it—Bazgveiq yozbaij(Betgveiq yozbaij).
Doengzseiz de lij gamj yiengq gyaudiuzcujyi sijyoz diuhcan, daez ok le gij
yawjfap moq Cungguek lizsij mboujmiz nuzli sevei, baenzneix ndaej yozsuzgai
goeng nyinh guh bouxdaeuz Bazgveiq yozbaij caeuq daujswh Fouznuz yozbaij.

［1］《Bouxcuengh Boux Gyausou Daihhag Daih’it Vih Yinghyungz Veiz Bazginz
Laebcienz》,《Cunghgoz Sinhvwnz Cuzbanj Bau》, 2008 nienz 10 nyied 22 hauh.

［2］Cinz Gizswngh sij:《Sawq Lwnh Bazgveiq yozbaij Ndaw Minzcuzyoz
Cunghgoz》,《Gvangjsih Sevei Gohyoz》daih 7-11 geiz, 2008 nienz 7-11 nyied.



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haijhaek

Haijhaek (Black sea) dwg aen haijndaw Daihloeg Eu-Ya, miz iek 42.4 fanh
bingzfueng goengleix gvangq. Haijhaek caeuq Haijndawdieg doenggvaq Haijyaz
Dujwjgiz doxlienz. Doengh diuz dah laux lae haeuj Haijhaek miz Dahdohnaujhoz
caueq Dahdiniezbozhoz. Doenghgiz guekgya bangxhaij miz
Dwjwjgiz、Baujgyalizya、Lozmajnizya、Vuhgwzlanz、Wzlozswh caeuq Gwzlujgizya.

Haijhaek gvangq lai, yangjheiq noix.
黑海本身很深（最深處超過2000米），全世界深度最深的內海之一。黑海从河流和地中海流入的水含盐度比较小，因此比较轻，它们浮在含盐度高的海水上。这样深水和浅水之间
得不到交流。两层水的交界处位于100到150米深处之间。两层水之间彻底交流一次需要上千年之久。海底的生物尸体腐化分解时消耗的氧气得不到补充。在这个严重缺氧的环境
中只有厌氧微生物可以生存。它们的新陈代谢释放二氧化碳和有毒的硫化氢（H2S）。其他生物实际上只能生存在200米深度以上的水里。



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emil_Fischer

Hermann Emil Fischer（1852 nienz 10 nyied 9 hauh －1919 nienz 7 nyied 15 hauh）,
Dwzgoz vaqhaggya. De habsingz le bwnzginj, youq gwn leixlwnh dawz gij caedgou
dangzmakit yenzgiu yienh lo. Youq 1902 nienz ndaej Nobel vaqhag ciengj.

Fischer was born in Euskirchen, near Cologne, the son of a businessman. After
graduating he wished to study natural sciences, but his father compelled him to
work in the family business until determining that his son was unsuitable.
Fischer then attended the University of Bonn in 1872, but switched to the
University of Strasbourg in 1872. He earned his doctorate in 1874 with his study
of phthalein and was appointed to a position at the university.

In 1875 von Baeyer was asked to succeed Liebig at the University of Munich and
Fischer went there with him to become an assistant in organic chemistry.

In 1878 Fischer qualified as a Privatdozent at Munich, where he was appointed
Associate Professor of Analytical Chemistry in 1879. In the same year he was
offered, but refused, the Chair of Chemistry at Aachen.

In 1881 he was appointed Professor of Chemistry at the University of Erlangen
and in 1883 he was asked by the Badische Anilin- und Soda-Fabrik to direct its
scientific laboratory. Fischer, however, whose father had now made him
financially independent, preferred academic work.

In 1885 he was asked to become Professor of Chemistry at the University of
Würzburg and here he remained until 1892, when he was asked to succeed A. W.
Hofmann in the Chair of Chemistry at the University of Berlin. Here he remained
until his death in 1919.

Fischer's early discovery of phenylhydrazine and its influence on his later work
have already been mentioned. While he was at Munich, Fischer continued to work
on the hydrazines and, working there with his cousin Otto Fischer, who had
followed him to Munich, he and Otto worked out a new theory of the constitution
of the dyes derived from triphenylmethane, proving this by experimental work to
be correct.

At Erlangen, Fischer studied the active principles of tea, coffee and cocoa,
namely, caffeine and theobromine, and established the constitution of a series
of compounds in this field, eventually synthesizing them.

The work, however, on which Fischer's fame chiefly rests, was his studies of the
purines and the sugars. This work, carried out between 1882 and 1906 showed that
various substances, little known at that time, such as adenine, xanthine, in
vegetable substances, caffeine and, in animal excrement, uric acid and guanine,
all belonged to one homogeneous family and could be derived from one another and
that they corresponded to different hydroxyl and amino derivatives of the same
fundamental system formed by a bicyclic nitrogenous structure into which the
characteristic urea group entered. This parent substance, which at first he
regarded as being hypothetical, he called purine in 1884, and he synthesized it
in 1898. Numerous artificial derivatives, more or less analogous to the
naturally-occurring substances, came from his laboratory between 1882 and 1896.

In 1884 Fischer began his great work on the sugars, which transformed the
knowledge of these compounds and welded the new knowledge obtained into a
coherent whole. Even before 1880 the aldehyde formula of glucose had been
indicated, but Fischer established it by a series of transformations such as
oxidation into aldonic acid and the action of phenylhydrazine which he had
discovered and which made possible the formation of the phenylhydrazones and the
osazones. By passage to a common osazone, he established the relation between
glucose, fructose and mannose, which he discovered in 1888. In 1890, by
epimerization between gluconic and mannonic acids, he established the
stereochemical and isomeric nature of the sugars, and between 1891 and 1894 he
established the stereochemical configuration of all the known sugars and exactly
foretold the possible isomers, by an ingenious application of the theory of the
asymmetrical carbon atom of Van't Hoff and Le Bel, published in 1874. Reciprocal
syntheses between different hexoses by isomerization and then between pentoses,
hexoses, and heptoses by reaction of degradation and synthesis proved the value
of the systematics he had established. His greatest success was his synthesis of
glucose, fructose and mannose in 1890, starting from glycerol.

This monumental work on the sugars, carried out between 1884 and 1894, was
extended by other work, the most important being his studies of the glucosides.

Between 1899 and 1908 Fischer made his great contributions to knowledge of the
proteins. He sought effective analytical methods of separating and identifying
the individual amino acids, discovering a new type, the cyclic amino acids:
proline and hydroxyproline. He also studied the synthesis of proteins by
obtaining the various amino acids in an optically active form in order to unite
them. He was able to establish the type of bond that would connect them together
in chains, namely, the peptide bond, and by means of this he obtained the
dipeptides and later the tripeptides and polypeptides. In 1901 he discovered, in
collaboration with Ernest Fourneau, the synthesis of the dipeptide,
glycylglycine, and in that year he also published his work on the hydrolysis of
casein. Amino acids occurring in nature were prepared in the laboratory and new
ones were discovered. His synthesis of the oligopeptides culminated in an
octodecapeptide, which had many characteristics of natural proteins. This and
his subsequent work led to a better understanding of the proteins and laid the
foundations for later studies of them.

In addition to his work in the fields already mentioned, Fischer also studied
the enzymes and the chemical substances in the lichens which he found during his
frequent holidays in the Black Forest, and also substances used in tanning and,
during the final years of his life, the fats. In 1890, he also proposed a "Lock
and Key Model" to visualize the substrate and enzyme interaction. Though, later
studies did not support this model in all enzymatic reactions.

Fischer is noted for his work on sugars among other work the organic synthesis
of (+) glucose and purines (including the first synthesis of caffeine).

At the age of 18, before he went to the University of Bonn, Fischer suffered
from gastritis, which attacked him again towards the end of his tenure of the
Chair at Erlangen and caused him to refuse a tempting offer to follow Victor
Meyer at the Federal Technical University at Zurich and to take a year's leave
of absence before he went, in 1888, to Würzburg. Throughout his life he was well
served by his excellent memory, which enabled him, although he was not a
naturally good speaker, to memorize manuscripts of lectures that he had written.

He was particularly happy at Würzburg where he enjoyed walks among the hills and
he also made frequent visits to the Black Forest. His administrative work,
especially when he went to Berlin, revealed him as a tenacious campaigner for
the establishment of scientific foundations, not only in chemistry, but in other
fields of work as well. His keen understanding of scientific problems, his
intuition and love of truth and his insistence on experimental proof of
hypotheses, marked him as one of the truly great scientists of all time.

In 1888 Fischer married Agnes Gerlach, daughter of Joseph von Gerlach, Professor
of Anatomy at Erlangen. His wife died seven years after their marriage. They had
three sons, one of whom was killed in World War I; another committed suicide at
the age of 25 as a result of compulsory military training. In 1919 in Berlin,
Fischer, like his son, committed suicide. The oldest son, Hermann Otto Laurenz
Fischer, was Professor of Biochemistry in the University of California at
Berkeley from 1948 until his death in 1960.



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benjamin_Franklin

Benjamin Franklin（1706 nienz 1 nyied 17 hauh - 1790 nienz 4 nyied 17 hauh），seng
youq Boston Massachusetts Meijgoz. De dwg mizmingz dih
cwngcigya、gohyozgya、bohyaenq、bouxgeiq、cozgya、bouxsienh, lij dwg vaiqgyaugya
caeuq farmingzgya. De camgya le haujlai vwnzgen youqgaenj dih bienraiz, caemh
dandang Meijgoz youq Fazgoz dih daihsawj, ceng'aeu Fazgoz cihciz Meijgoz daeuj
duzliz.
班傑明·富蘭克林曾經進行多項關於電的實驗，並且發明了避雷針。他還發明了雙焦點眼鏡，蛙鞋等等。班傑明·富蘭克林是共濟會的成員，被選為英國皇家學會院士。他亦是美國首
位邮政局长。

班傑明·富蘭克林的父親若西亞·富蘭克林（Josiah Franklin ）生於1657年，是英格蘭北安普顿郡的一個鐵匠家庭之子。母親艾比亞·富爾家（Abiah
Folger
）則是在1667年時出生於一麻薩諸塞州波士頓的學校教師家庭。若西亞·富蘭克林於1677年年在英格蘭首次結婚，生下數名兒女後，在1683年舉家離開英格蘭移居波士頓
，以售賣雜貨為生。之後他首任妻子去世，再娶的妻子艾比亞在波士頓生下本傑明·富蘭克林。

班傑明·富蘭克林是他父親十七名子女中最小的兒子。他上學至十歲，十二歲時在他兄長的出版社當學徒。十七歲時出走到費城，數月後到倫敦，在一家印刷廠內工作。後來在一名商
人幫助下回到費城，成立了他自己的印刷公司，出版報紙，並且發表自己的文章，在當地的社會中得到相當的尊重。之後他出版的一本箴言書籍，令他大受歡迎。

1731年班傑明·富蘭克林與其他人合力組建了費城的第一家公共圖書館。圖書館收藏的書籍包括神學、歷史、文學、科學等；之後北美各城市亦效法建立；對北美各地人民的啟蒙
起了不少作用。

1740年，班傑明·富蘭克林與Deborah Read以普通法婚姻（Common-law marriage）關係結合。富蘭克林與Deborah
Read在1724年曾訂過婚，因為女方家長反對而未能實現，Read另嫁他人。後來Deborah
Read被丈夫遺棄，其夫從此不知下落，依照當時法律，Read一輩子沒有再婚的自由。因此班傑明·富蘭克林與Deborah Read終身不能循合法形式成為夫妻。

1748年，班傑明·富蘭克林退出了他的印刷生意，不過他仍然能從他的合夥人手中分得印刷店可觀的利潤，亦因此有時間進行他各樣發明和研究，當中包括了他對電的研究。他發
現電荷分為「正」、「負」，而且兩者的數量是守恆的。1752年，富蘭克林進行了一項著名的實驗：在雷暴下放風箏，示範證明「雷電」是由電力造成。這是一項非常危險的試驗
，事實上，同時期有其他科學家進行類似的實驗時被電殛死亡。至今不少人對於班傑明·富蘭克林當年是否真的進行了這樣的實驗，或實驗到底是如何進行，仍然表示有懷疑。但沒有
疑問的是班傑明·富蘭克林發明了避雷針；皇家學會亦為表揚富蘭克林對電的研究，在1753年選他為院士。

除了研究電以外，班傑明·富蘭克林對氣象學亦有所貢獻。為了替他的報章尋找新聞，他經常到農夫市場去收集消息。他發現風暴經常在某地出現，然後在別的地方亦有風暴。他相信
兩者可能其實是同一個風暴，因此提出風暴會移動，最後衍生了日後出現的天氣分析、天氣圖，改變了單純依靠一地預報的方法。

班傑明·富蘭克林同時是一名出色的公職人員。不過他亦因為曾以權力替親人謀求進昇，使他的公務生涯蒙上污點。他最重要的政治成就包括改革北美的郵政系統，以及出任外交職位
，分別代表北美殖民地與宗主國英國打交道，以及之後出使法國。

1754年，他率領賓夕法尼亞州代表參加在紐約州奥尔巴尼舉行的殖民地大會，提出各殖民聯合的計劃。雖然當時計劃沒有被接納，但當中的不少內容之後被放進了美國的憲法內。
1757年，他代表賓夕法尼亞州人到英國向英王陳述，居住了五年，期間向英國人民及政府官員闡述了殖民地的狀況和意見。牛津大學因為他在科學的成就，在這段時間頒贈他榮譽
博士學位。他亦是在這段時間為William Franklin奔走，使他成功當上新澤西州的州長。

1764年班傑明·富蘭克林再度代表賓夕法尼亞州到英格蘭。在倫敦時他力主反對1765年的印捐法案。但是班傑明·富蘭克林同時為他的私交朋友取得美洲印捐代理人的職位，
令他的誠信及民眾支持度大為受損。一般相信這次利益衝突事件令班傑明·富蘭克林在日後再沒有當上更高民選職位。縱使他成功令這法案得到取消，公眾對他的支持已不再復返。但
他仍然為美洲殖民地效力，在美國革命前替殖民地向英國陳情。這亦導致了班傑明·富蘭克林和他效忠英王的私生子William Franklin決裂。

1767年，班傑明·富蘭克林到法國，受到法國人的熱烈歡迎。1775年3月，从英国伦敦回到美国。回到費城以後，他獲選為大陸國會的成員，協助起草《美國獨立宣言》。1
776年，富蘭克林被派到法國任代表美國的專員，一直至1785年。其間他很受法國社會各階層的歡迎，有些富有的法國家族甚至流行以他的畫像裝飾畫廊。班傑明·富蘭克林出
使法國十分成功，取得對初生美國非常重要的法、美軍事同盟，以及談判簽訂了1783年的《巴黎條約》。當班傑明·富蘭克林在1785年回到美國時，他對美國獨立作出的貢獻
只在華盛頓之下。

1787年，已經退休的班傑明·富蘭克林出席了修改美國憲法的會議，成為唯一同時簽署美國三項最重要法案文件的建國先賢。這三份文件分別是：《獨立宣言》，《1783年巴
黎條約》，以及1787年的《美國憲法》。在這一年，富蘭克林捐款修建了以他命名的富兰克林·马歇尔大学。

較少人知道的是，雖然班傑明·富蘭克林是著名的美國建國元勳，但在美國革命開始以前，他主要是作為外交人員，亦曾經強烈反對革命。只有在英國不可能在美洲殖民地維持統治的
時候，他才成為獨立運動的熱切支持者。直至1780年，他仍然考慮願意容許英國保持對美洲的主權，以換取殖民地的高度自治。

班傑明·富蘭克林在大部分的情況下吃素，但有時仍會食用少數魚肉產品，因此不能算是純粹的素食者。他吃素的原因，一來是反對將動物做為食物原料，二來是為了健康理由，三來
是想要省錢買書，因為在當時蔬菜的價錢較魚肉便宜。

富蘭克林是一個让人惊奇的發明家。
他擁有許多作品，像避雷針，玻璃harmonica（一種玻璃樂器，容易與金屬口琴混淆），富蘭克林爐(新式火爐)，雙焦距眼鏡和導尿管等等 。
富蘭克林從來沒有將他的發明申請專利，在他的 自傳中
他寫道，「...因為我們享有很大的優勢，從他人的發明，我們應該感到高興的就是有一個機會為他人服務，我們在這一點，應該做的自由，且慷慨的。」
他的發明還包括社會創新，如讓愛傳出去(paying forward) 。富蘭克林的魅力與創新可以被看作是無私的，他說，他的科學發明是要用於提高效率和人類進步。
例如,藉由他發明的印刷機,加速了新聞服務的傳播速率。

富蘭克林強調：唯有當人民是貞潔的，新共和國才可能生存。他的一生便在探索這公民角色與個人美德之間的關係，就像Poor
Richard所表達的箴言一樣。他認為：有組織的宗教，需留有好男人及他們的同胞，但他自己卻很少出席禮拜。當富蘭克林在巴黎會見了Voltaire，便請這位了不起的
傳道士保佑他的孫子，Voltaire用英文說了「上帝和自由」，並加上這句話－「這是致贈給富蘭克林先生的孫子唯一適當的祝福」。

富蘭克林的雙親皆為虔誠的清教徒，他們加入了波士頓最自由的清教徒們所參加的Old South
Church（古老的南方教堂），富蘭克林也於1706年在那裡受洗禮。他的父親是位貧困可憐的雜貨商，擁有一本Bonifacius的拷貝書，書名為：做好你的文章（E
ssays to Do Good~by Cotton Mather and
preacher），這本書便對富蘭克林的人生產生了關鍵性的影響。富蘭克林的第一個筆名：Silence
Dogood－被Mather賦予尊敬及不到的意味。書中亦提及：成立志願協會對社會的好處，因為從Cotton
Mather身上，富蘭克林得知成立這個協會將會對社會產生貢獻，但富蘭克林的組織技能才是影響美國人忍讓個性的最主要因素。

富蘭克林在1728年公開了他的信仰並出版了這本書，書中並未提及諸多清教徒們的思想，像救世、地獄、耶穌的神威等等。他也在1776年的自傳中澄清，自己身為一位自然神
論者，仍然保有著對上帝的堅強的信念：道德善良的人們及清教徒對美國獨立的責任。（它便是富蘭克林在1787年6月的憲法大會中，告訴人們每日禱告詞的實踐內容。）

在First Great Awakening（第一大覺醒）[1]期間，富蘭克林對於福音派長老George
Whitefield來說，是一個熱心的支持者。富蘭克林並不強力支持Whitefield的理論，但對於「藉由做好事來規勸人們崇拜上帝」這部分，他卻是敬仰White
field的。富來克林出版了Whitefield所有的佈道和日誌，也因此促進了Great Awakening（大覺醒）[2]。



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Massachusetts

Majsazcuhsai couh（Vahyingh:Massachusetts） dwg aen couh Meijgoz, youq baih
doengbaek guek neix, dwg dingz Sinh Yinghgwzlanz ndeu.

麻州的首府是波士頓，現在的州長是德瓦爾‧帕特里克。兩位參議員分別是民主黨及共和黨黨員。在2001年調整後的眾議院席位，麻州配有10席。州議會有個很正式的名稱「偉
大暨統管的聯邦議院」，州內並設有「最高司法法院」。

州法對市和鎮分的很清楚，目前最大且人口最多的鎮是弗明罕。從政治角度來看，市和鎮的最大區別是，鎮沒有鎮長，在治理上是由鎮民大會做出決定。市則有市議會，市長或是市政
官並不是每個市都有。這種管理法是在1820年代就開始了，在這之前，就只有鎮民大會。麻州有些鎮後來已經升格而成為市，但是地名還是保有「鎮」這個字在裡頭，比如水鎮。

麻州北鄰新罕布什爾州和佛蒙特州，西接紐約州，南靠康涅狄格州和羅德島州，東邊則是面臨大西洋。東南邊的海岸之外有馬薩葡萄園島和南塔克特。波士頓是最大的都市，然而大部
份的大波士頓地區的人口（約4,000,000）並不住在波士頓市裡頭。

在大多數的州，一個鎮是一個小型的管轄區域。在鎮與鎮之間則是處於無市鎮政府管轄的狀態，而且土地面積往往很大。相比之下，一個州則是完全劃分為
郡，州內每一吋土地都會有某個郡在管轄。郡政府因此佔有很重要的地位，特別是對於那些住在鎮與鎮之間的人，他們往往在經營一些很重要的事業，比如經營機場等等。

和上述的其它州不同的是，麻州把州內的土地全部劃分給各市鎮，每一吋土地都會有某個市或者是鎮在管轄，不會落得沒政府管的下場。不過這種分法當要和上述的其他州作比較時會
變得很複雜，比如麻州是以各個市鎮為單位來作調查數據，但是其他州卻是依據美國人口調查局的規定以較大範圍的包含數個較小市鎮的分法來作調查，因此無法很直接的作對等的比
較。

1990年中期中塞克斯郡郡政府因為經營郡立醫院不善導致整個郡瀕臨破產，然後在1997年州議會介入並且取走所有的資產和職權。中塞克斯郡政府於是在1997年7月11
日正式被廢除。過後不久，法蘭克林郡委員會自己投票決定廢除自己的郡政府。用來廢除前面幾個郡的廢除法也被延用到其他的郡，像是漢普頓郡和沃斯特郡於1998年7月1日被
廢除。這條廢除法之後又附加一些條款以用於在1999年
麻薩諸塞州1日廢除罕布什爾郡，同一年的7月1日用於廢除艾塞克斯郡，以及2000年7月1日廢除伯客什爾郡。其它的郡則可以引用「馬薩諸塞州一般法第34B章」自行投票
決定廢除自己的郡，或是重新改組為「區域性的政府委員會」。

麻州人口只佔全國總人口的2.5%，但是麻州的四年制大學學院數目卻佔了全國總數目的4.5%（請參照馬薩諸塞州大學學院列表）。八個波士頓地區的學術機構(哈佛大學、麻
省理工學院、波士頓大學、波士頓學院、布蘭迪斯大學|布蘭戴斯大學、東北大學、塔芙茨大學和麻州大學波士頓分校)，他們稱呼自己為「研究型大學麻薩諸塞州，根據他們所說，
他們是二次世界大戰後的「經濟成長動力」，現階段則是每年對於麻州經濟有70億美金的助益。因為大波士頓地區擁有大量的大學和學院，每逢學年的開始，大波士頓地區的的人口
數總是會突然暴增。（請參照大波士頓地區大學學院列表）

麻州的哈佛大學是長春藤聯盟大學的一員，並且有三所大學是屬於七姊妹學園：聖尤克山學院，史密斯學院和衛斯理學院。科技導向方面的大學則有麻省理工學院和沃斯特理工學院。
位於麻州靠近中西部的著名大學院校有位於先鋒山谷的五大學院（聖尤克山學院，史密斯學院，
安姆赫斯特學院，罕布什爾學院，位於安姆赫斯特的麻州大學總部）和威廉斯學院。音樂學校則有柏克萊音樂學院和新英格蘭音樂學校。另外還有知名的獨立研究機構，包含烏茲豪海
洋科學學院和海洋生物研究室。



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cuenghhag

Cuenghhag (Cang’yoz ; Sawgun: 壮学; Bingqyaem: Zhuàngxué) dwg monz yozgoh aeu
Bouxcuengh daeuj guh yenhgiu duisieng he. De dawz Bouxcuengh aen minzcuz neix
guhbaenz aen cingjdij ndeu daeuj gaujcaz, yenhgiu Bouxcuengh gij lizsij caeuq
vwnzva gijyenz、bencenh、fazcanj gocwngz de, yenhgiu Bouxcuengh youq fazcanj
gyaeraez ndawde caemdingh gij vuzciz vwnzva、cingsaenz vwnzva caeuq cidu vwnzva
gij nei’hanz、dwzcwngh、gunghnwngz caeuq fazcanj gveihliz de,yenhgiu Bouxcuengh
sevei、cunghgyau、ginghci、gyauyuz、sinhlij、swnghdai、gohgi doengh gij fuengfueng
mienhmienh neix. De dwg Yinzvwnz sevei gohyoz ndawde monz yozgoh doglaeb he,miz
gij daegdiemj cunghhozsing caeuq gyauhcahsing de.

Cuenghhag gij yenhgiu neiyungz de gvangq dangqmaz, sezgiz daengz Bouxcuengh gij
lizsij、yijyenz、cunghgyau、vwnzva、ginghci、vwnzyoz、yisuz、gyauyuz、cezyoz、minzsuz、sin
hlij、yihyoz、gohgi、sevei sujsiz、sevei bencenh caeuq diegcuengh yendaiva gocwngz
ndawde daez okdaeuj gij lijlun vwndiz caeuq sizcenj vwndiz de, gij yenhgiu
fanveiz de hamjgvaq yinzvwnz gohyoz、sevei gohyoz caeuq mbangj swyenz gohyoz
lingjyiz, goj naeuz Cuenghhag bauhamz liux Bouxcuengh sevei gij swnghcanjliz
caeuq swnghcanj gvanhhi、ginghci gihcuj caeuq baihgwnz gencuz sojmiz neiyungz.
Neix baez ding’yi le gangjmingz, Cuenghhag cix dwg gvendaengz gij yozvwn
Bouxcuengh caeuq gij cihsiz dijyi gag doglaeb de, caemh eiqhoz naeuz Cuenghhag
bauhamz miz song daih yenhgiu cujdiz, it dwg gvendaengz Bouxcuengh gij lizsij
caeuq vwnzva yenhgiu; ngeih dwg Bouxcuengh yendaiva yenhgiu. Duenh seizneix
Cuenghhag yenhgiu lij aeu gij baihnaj guhcawj, dinglai yawjnaek Bouxcuengh gij
lizsij、vuzciz vwnzva caeuq cingsaenz vwnzva yenhgiu.

Cuenghhag guh monz yozgoh gohyoz he, dinglai vunz nyinhnaeuz dwg daj ngeihcib
si’gij 50 nienzdaih heijdaeuz. Bouxcuengh boux daih’it lizsij yozgyah caeuq
minzcuz yozgyah Vangz Yenfanh gyausou youq 50 nienzdaih guhdaeuz guh ndaej
haujlai gij gvangjsih saujsu minzcuz lizsij diucaz caeuq yenhgiu cingzgoj de,
hawj Cuenghhag ndaej hwngvuengh laebdingh liux gij gohyoz dijyi giekdaej
maenhsaed de, gijneix gaenq bouxboux cungj naeuz dwg lo. Vangz Yenbanh gyausou
deng vunzlai naeuz dwg cungjsae Cuenghhag le, yienghneix gij lwgsae de Vangz
Swnghging、Cangh Yizminz、Veiz Gingvwnj、Suz Gvancangh、Siuh Swzcangh、Vangz
Veijcingz、Liz Gozcuz、Lij Ganfwnh、Couh Cunghhenz、Yi Cizgaih、Hoz Lungzginz、Gungh
Yungjveih doengh boux gyausou roxnaeuz yenhgiuyenz neix,cungj baenz Cuenghhag
daih’it、ngeih、sam daih daibyauj yozcej de caez.



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simleixhag

Simleixhag(Sawgun: 心理学) dwg monz gohyoz, yenzgiu vunzlai caueq doenghduz dih
simleix yienhyiengh、cingsaenz goengnaengz caeuq hingzveiz. De gawq dwg leixlwnh
yozgoh, lij dwg yinghyungh yozgoh.

心理学研究涉及知觉、认知、情绪、人格、行为和人际关系等许多领域，也与日常生活的许多领域——家庭、教育、健康等发生关联。心理学一方面尝试用大腦運作來解釋個人基本的
行為與心理机能，同時，心理學也尝试解释個人心理机能在社會社会行为与社会动力中的角色；同時它也與神經科學、醫學、生物學等科學有關，因為這些科學所探討的生理作用會影
響個人的心智。

早期的心理學研究是属于哲学的范畴，称为哲學心理學。哲學心理學的研究可以追溯到中國、埃及、希腊和印度等古代文明。中國古代認為人的性情思想是由一定的器官承擔的，並且
其活動會在器官上反映出來，如“心之官則思”（《孟子》），“人精在腦”、“頭者神之所居”（《春秋元命苞》）。“神形合一”、“形神相印”等思想在《黃帝內經》等涉及醫
學心理的著作中有很多闡述和應用。在古希腊语中，心理学由“灵魂”（ψυχή ）和“研究”（λόγος
）所组成。柏拉圖提出過二元並存的理念，有人认为亚里斯多德《论灵魂》是西方最早的一部论述心理学思想的著作。經由長久的演變，慢慢的產生各式各樣不同的學科，包括了現在
人所了解的心理學。

哲學心理學主要是在探討心身關係、天性與教養、自由意志與決定論、知識來源等四大議題。其早期的理論有一元論、二元論、環境決定論、精神決定論等。近代的哲學心理學則是有
三大思想流派，包括了理性主義、經驗主義與浪漫主義。正如德国心理学家艾宾浩斯所说：“心理学有一个漫长的过去，却只有一个短暂的历史”。

虽然心理学实验可以追溯到阿拉伯学者海什木的著作《光学》（1021年）不过，心理学作为一门独立的实验学科是开始于1879年，那一年，冯特 (Wilhelm
Wundt)
在德国的莱比锡大学建立第一个专门的心理实验室，冯特也因此被称为“心理学之父”。通常将1879年作为科学心理学诞生的时间，这一时间比许多自然科学脱离哲学而形成独立
学科的时间为晚。冯特也是第一个把自己称为心理学家的人。其他早期而重要的心理學家包括艾賓浩斯等。19世纪末、20世纪初，西格蒙德·弗洛伊德（Freud）的精神分析
学派兴起。

在整个20世纪的上半叶，行为主义学派支配了当时的心理学，其主张心理学是：“寻求理解特定的环境刺激如何控制特定类型的行为”。其主张心理学应分析先行的环境条件，即在
行为之前出现、而且为一个机体产生反应或抑制反应提供活动场所的条件。因此，他们把行为反应看做是机体理解、预测和控制的行为，并因此做出相应的结果。基于对实验和变量的
严格控制和强调，行为主义学对后来的心理学研究有着重要的影响。其代表人物為史金納 (B.F. Skinner
)，然而其對於內在的認知歷程是存而不論，近期流行的認知主義則是重視之前忽視的內在認知歷程，代表人物有皮亞杰 (Piaget )、米勒、西蒙等。

模板:Main
根據理論或觀察作出假設，在控制實驗情境中各種情況下操纵自变量（不止一個），觀察因变量的結果。對結果進行統計分析，控制無關變量產生的效果後檢驗假設，並進行推論：自
变量是否對因变量產生效果，即自变量和因变量間是否有因果關係（一般找出兩者的相關度，然後再證實因果關係）。亦會根據數據分析，找出兩者的相關係數，然後判斷是否有研究
價值。

例：巴甫洛夫實驗(制約反射)中的狗。每當響鈴，狗就分泌大量唾液。實驗涉及自变量（獨變項）(Independent
Variable)，因变量（依變項）(Dependent
Variable)。铃铛是IV，狗的唾液是DV。自变量是在實驗者的控制變數，因变量是會自变量而變動的變數。實驗法重視的是可信度和可重複性。

档案研究法：是指依据一定目的收集大量现有资料，通过分析找出某些现象与心理之间关系的一种度.档案研究法有广义和狭义之分，广义的档案研究法除了传统的参考资料还包括视
听影像资料，狭义的档案资料包括报纸、杂志、会议记录、政府公文、个人书信等文字材料。档案研究法的使用能弥补其他一些研究方法的不足，但有其缺点，需要视情况而定。

心理学所包含的研究领域甚为宽广，并使用许多不同的方法来心理过程与行为。心理学主要分为理论心理学和应用心理学两大领域，其下又可分为许多次领域，例如教育心理学、变态
心理学、管理心理学等。



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dauhgyau

Dauhgyau(道教), Cunghgoz cienzdungj coenggyau, youq ciuhgonq couh miz. Doengh
bouxdauh baiqfug haujlai bouxsien, gyoengqde maqmuengh ndaej dauh baenz
sien、bang seiq gouq vunz. Dauhgyau mboujdan youq Cunghgoz cienzdungj vwnzvaq
youqgaenj raixcaix, caemh doiq cienz lajmbwn miz itdingh yingjyangj.
。道家雖然從戰國時代即為諸子百家之一，但直到漢朝之後才有教團產生，其個別派係為奉老子為道德天尊，把原為道德哲學家神化了。至南北朝时道教宗教形式逐渐完善。

道教以“道”为最高信仰，认为“道”是化生宇宙万物的本原。在中华传统文化中，道教（包括道家、術士等）被认为是与儒学和佛教一起的一种占据着主导地位的理论学说和尋求有
關实践練成神仙的方法。

现在學術界所说的道教，是指在中国古代宗教信仰的基础上，承袭了方仙道、黄老道等一些宗教观念和修持方法，逐步形成的以“道”作为最高信仰。主要是奉太上老君为教主，並以
老子的《道德经》等为主要经典，追求修炼成为神仙的一种中國的宗教，道教成仙或成神的主要方法大致可以歸納為五種，服食仙藥，外丹等，煉氣與導引，內丹修煉，並藉由道教科
儀與本身法術修為等儀式來功德成仙，常見後來的神仙多為內丹修煉和功德成神者與道術的修練者。

道教是中國土生土長的宗教，並經過長期的歷史發展而形成的。但是道教与道家是不同的,因为道家是学问,道教是宗教.道教的科仪与祭祀最早可追朔於原始時期的崇拜自然與鬼神
，從最早的人神溝通的占卜等多種方式，原始宗教逐漸演變成商周時期的祭祀上天和祖先。到春秋戰國時期，古代宗教經歷了顯著的理性化演變，與社會文化知識的分化。諸子百家尤
以道、儒、墨為「顯學」且當時的陰陽家、神仙家興起，在歷史有所的影響。至東漢,社會因為戰亂與漢朝崩潰導致對宗教產生急迫的需求，於是原本儒學逐漸宗教化，此時也於傳入
佛教。在這種社會背景下，道教的主要创始人物张道陵綜合傳統的鬼神崇拜、神仙思想、陰陽術數,巫术并於與漢代所崇尚黃老道家的思潮逐漸融合；道教教派也於此時形成。

由於受歐美文化影響，現在中文中的“道教”一詞，認爲起源於西元142年東漢張道陵所創立的「五斗米道」。（注：這種歷史觀，不能被道教内部人士接受，道教内部一般認爲道
教起源于傳説中的黃帝。）。然而事實上早在東漢之前道教已有許多宗派，以史籍所載所曰，有關張陵、張魯的事蹪，來論述道教不創自三張父子模板:Notetag，而《後漢書
》有文於下：張魯字公旗。初祖父陵，順帝時客於蜀，學道鶴鳴山中，造作符書以惑百姓。受其道者輒出米五斗，故謂之米賊。陵傳子衡，衡傳於魯，魯遂自號師君。其來學者，被名
為鬼卒，後號祭酒。祭酒各領部眾，眾多者名曰理頭。皆校以誠信，不聽欺妄。有病，但令首過而已。諸祭酒各起義舍於路，同之亭傳，縣置米肉以給行旅。食者量腹取足，過多則鬼
能病之。犯法者先加三原，然後行刑，不置長吏，以祭酒為理，民夷信向。朝廷不能討，遂就拜魯鎮夷中郎將，領漢寧太守，通其貢獻。

又《三國志張魯傳》劉宋．裴松之注引《典略》：熹平中（靈帝年號，西元一七二～一七七年），妖賊大起，三輔有駱曜。光和中（西元一八～一八三年），東方有張角，漢中有張脩
。駱曜教民緬匿法，角為太平道，脩為五斗米道。太平道者，師持九節杖，為符祝（咒）。教病人叩頭思過，因以符水飲之，得病或日淺而愈者，則云此人信道；其或不愈，則為不信
道。脩法略與角同，加施靜室，使病者處其中思過；又使人為姦令、祭酒。祭酒主以老子五文，使都習，號為姦令，為鬼吏，主為病者請禱。請禱之法，書病人姓名，說服罪之意，作
三通，其一上之天，著山上；其一埋之地；其一沉之水；謂之三官手書。使病者家出米五斗以為常，故號曰五斗米師。實無益於治病，但為淫妄，然小人昏愚，競共事之。後角被誅，
脩亦亡。及魯在漢中，因其民信行脩業，遂增飾之。教使作義舍，以米肉置其中以止行人。又教使自隱，有小過者，當治道百步，則罪除。又依《月令》，春夏禁殺，又禁酒。流移寄
在其地者，不敢不奉。在《典略》這段文獻的記載中，裴松之以為張脩是張衡之誤。姑且不論人名是否有誤；但可以很清楚看出當時的教派相當多；五斗米道與太平道一樣，都僅能算
是道教的一個派別支流；在當時的道教，不僅僅是張陵張魯一家而已。而且或說張陵撰，或說張魯撰，常以「偽伎」一語，來攻襲其他教派，可以看出當時不僅道教的派別多，還常互
相攻擊。又張道陵所傳之經，稱為正一經；而《雲笈七籤．卷六第四》：「《正一》者，真一為宗，大上所說。《正一經》，天師自云：『我受於太上老君，教以正一新出道法。謂之
新者，物厭故舊，盛新，新出，名異實同，學正除邪，仍用舊文，承先經教，無所改造。亦教人學仙，皆用上古之法。』王長慮後改易師法，故撰傳錄文，名曰《正一新出儀》。」由
張陵的標榜「新出」，可知當時舊經舊法固多。而通常宗教都是發展到某個階段後，才會定向分裂，成為多種不同的教派；由此可印證道教不創自張道陵。因而若以道教歸屬於張道陵
所創不合乎於史實。因此，其他道教分支为了以示区别，也就不再以“道教”自称。

道教的称呼在形成初期有所不同，先秦时期的诸子百家中许多人都曾经以“道”来称呼自己的理论和方法。儒家、墨家、道家、阴阳家甚至佛教都曾经由于各种原因自称或被认为是“
道教”。儒家最早使用“道教”一词，将堯、舜等先王之「道」和孔子的言「教」称为“道教”。佛教刚刚传入中国时，把“菩提”翻译成“道”(此部分之出處尚有待確定)，因此
也被称为“道教"。

道的教化时刻都运转，却又如虚无一般，看不见、模不着，单以文字无法言明，需以 “体验”
而得启悟，人以自身不同潜能条件、意识印象，因缘得以悟道，感应从“道教”所得，故产生了无数人士，黄帝、孔子、庄子、科学家等等都在这程度下，体验
“道教”，得以“受道”，着下阴阳、五行、仁爱、仙学、科学......等等无数的学说，人终其一生仍然努力朝“得道(成功)”方向走

道教虽奉老子为祖师，但其主张与老子、庄子的思想并不完全一致，而更多得益于汉初盛行的以老子之名言修道养寿的黄老道。道教的另一渊源是始于战国、盛于秦汉的方仙道。方仙
道分行气（含导引）、服饵、房中三派。行气派尊彭祖、王乔、赤松子为始祖；服饵派以羡门、安期生为代表；房中派以容成、务成子为代表。此外，亦可遥追殷商的鬼神崇拜。

道教的內容，南朝梁刘勰《灭惑论》说是上标老子，次述神仙，下袭张陵。宋马端临《文献通考》卷二二五说：道家之术，杂而多端。早期道教的经籍中，最早用道教一词的是张鲁撰
《老子想尔注》：“真道藏，邪文出，世间常伪使称道教，皆为大伪不可用。”接著便是晋代葛洪《抱朴子·内篇·明本篇》说：“惟道家之教，使人精神专一，动合无形。”

值得注意道教在其逐渐形成过程中，与当时正进入中国的佛教的互动（佛教对道教的影响以及道家对佛教中国化的影响）。道教早期没有佛教的木鱼与圆磬
钟等法器,后来在隋唐时引入道教乐器中.佛教也没有疏文,抽签后来从道教引入.道教早期只有杀鬼,禁鬼的法术没有有炼度鬼的法术,是受到佛教超度的法事才在魏晋南北朝一直
到明清才有各种炼度鬼魂的科仪,基本两教都有互相模仿.但是道教一直模仿儒佛二教的经典教义和法事.

道教的形成是一个缓慢的发展过程。作为道教最终形成的两个标志性事件，一是《太平经》的流传，一是张道陵的五斗米道（天师道）。汉顺帝时（126年—144年），-{于吉
}-（一說-{干吉}-）、宫崇所传的《太平清领书》（即所谓《太平经》，據信傳自汉成帝時齊人甘忠可編著的《包元太平經》）得到广泛传播。到汉灵帝时，張角奉《太平清领
书》传教，号为太平道，自称大贤良师，信徒遍布天下九州，已是颇有影响。后来，黄巾起义失败，太平道日趋衰微。同样是在东汉顺帝时，张道陵学道于蜀郡鹄鸣山，招徒传教，-
{信}-道者出米五斗，故称五斗米道（也有研究稱，乃因其崇信北斗南斗等五斗星，加之與蜀地彌教結合，故稱五斗彌教，後訛為五斗米教）。其孙张鲁保据汉中多年，后又与最高
统治当局合作，使得五斗米道的影响从西南一隅播于海内，遂发展为道教正宗天师道。

两晋南北朝时期，随着炼丹术的盛行和相关理论的深化，道教获得了很大发展。同时道教也吸取了当时风行的玄学，丰富了自己的理论。东晋建武元年，葛洪对战国以来的神仙家理论
进行了系统地论述，著作了《抱朴子》，是道教理论的第一次系统化，丰富了道教的思想内容。南北朝时，寇谦之在北魏太武帝支持下建立了“北天师道”，陆修静建立了“南天师道
”。

到了唐宋，唐高祖李渊认老子李耳为祖先，宋真宗、宋徽宗也极其崇-{信}-道教，宋徽宗更自號「教主道君皇帝」，道教因而备受尊崇，成为国教。此时出现了茅山派、阁皂派等
派别，天师道也重新兴起。自汉晋以来一直隐而不显的道教丹鼎一派，由于漢鍾離、吕洞宾等人的大力倡导，内丹之学始露于世。在理论方面，吕洞宾、陈抟、张伯端等人阐述的内丹
学说极为盛行。

此階段不僅中國內部道教有所發展，更藉由遷徙與文化交流發揚至亞洲其他各處。比方东晋末，五斗米道在中国南方发动起义失败后，卢循率部逃至越南(交州)。越南人李脱帮助卢
循进攻交州府城，失败后自尽。这是道教传入越南最早的记载。

在宋朝的道教，信州龍虎山天師世系之受封，始自宋真宗大中祥符九年（1016年）賜張正隨為貞靜先生。又據《宋史．仁宗本記》記載：天聖八年（1030年）五月甲寅，賜信
州龍虎山張乾曜號澄素先生。到宋徽宗時，雖寵信道士林靈素，但對天師世系亦只給予一般封贈模板:Notetag。

宋末元初的道教，在北方出现了王重陽创导的全真道。后来，王重阳的弟子丘处机为蒙古成吉思汗讲道，颇受信赖，被元朝统治者授予主管天下道教的权力。而同时，为应对全真道的
迅速崛起，原龙虎山天师道、茅山上清派、阁皂山灵宝派合并为正一道，尊张天师为正一教主，从而正式形成了道教北有全真派、南有正一派两大派别的格局。到元世祖未得位時，常
遣所信王先生渡江為間，不得達，留宿淮西者久之。欲歸，懼誅：念北人好鬼，可以計脫也。模板:Notetag

明代道教继元明之际(具体时间有争议)张三丰之后,又出现了新的发展,出现了“东派”大师陆西星，“西派”大师李涵虛。清朝由于很多汉族士人拥有反清思想，都皈依了全真教
龙门派，于是全真教出现了“龙门”中兴的现象。中华人民共和国成立以后，随着中国政府新的宗教政策的执行，以前的一些道教的清规戒律由于和现行法律-{zh-hans:抵
触;
zh-hant:牴觸}-而作废。1957年，中國大陸成立了中国道教协会，管理中国道教内部的事务。到文化大革命时期，道教同中国其他的宗教一样经受了一场浩劫。直到文
化大革命结束以后，道教才开始恢复正常的宗教活动。目前中國大陸的全真派和正一派道士約有5萬餘人，正式開放的道教宮觀有5千多處。道教组织有中国道教协会、省一级地方道
教协会、地区（市）一级地方道教协会。注意：由于道教派别众多，不是都有出家制度，所以道教的确切信仰人数是难以计数的。

台灣道教基本上隨著早期的漢人移民而來到台灣，日治時代末期，很多民眾信奉道教以表明自己的民族立場，因此道教備受打壓，道教宮觀屢遭損毀，必須兼供佛像或民間神祇才能得
以保全，這種混雜現象延續至今，且導致台灣道佛不分的情況。1949年，正一道的63代天師張恩溥輾轉到達台灣，1969年過世後，遷台江西省國大代表推張恩溥堂姪張源先
為六十四代天師，現居台灣嗣漢天師府。現據中華民國内政部統計道教乃為台灣第一大宗教。

道教天师道从创宗之初，漢代張道陵以老子的《道德经》为根本经典，将其中“道”和“德”作为基本的信仰。道教认为“道”是宇宙万物的本原和主宰，无所不在，无所不包，万物
都是从“道”演化而来的。而“德”则是“道”的体现。三清尊神則是“道”最初的人格化顯現，也代表了宇宙創生的三個重要過程（道生一，一生二，二生三，三生萬物——道德经
），三清化生出天地宇宙和自然諸神，這些稱為先天尊神（天尊），乃道所演化，先天既與道體合一，而道法無遠弗屆充斥無邊宇宙，故道教徒祝頌語常曰“無量天尊”，人類通過某
些方式可以達到與道合一的境界，這些人稱為後天神仙，最高修為者也可以達到天尊。

此外道教的至尊天神在歷史上的不同宗派道经中还有其他说法，一是以玉清元始天尊为最高天神，二是以上清靈寶天尊为最高天神，三是以太清道德天尊为最高天神，最後，演变成三
位一体的“一炁化三清”的神學理論。

另外道教的教主爭議，有人自稱道教教主是張道陵昧之史實，就道教而言教主還是太上老君，而玉清元始天尊为道，二是以上清靈寶天尊为經，三是以太清道德天尊为師，反觀道教經
典中，玉清與上清並未入世，太清並而入世傳道，就論而言道教教主是太上老君又稱道德天尊，政治家稱為老子。

道教重生恶死，追求长生不老，认为人的生命可以自己做主，而不用听命于天。认为人只要善于修道养生，就可以长生不老，得道成仙。因此也就产生了许多修炼方法：炼丹、服食、
吐纳、胎息、按摩、导引、房中、辟穀、存想、服符和诵经。

明朝道士张三丰认为道的功用是“修身利人”，儒家“行道济时”，佛家“悟道觉世”，道家“藏道度人”。道家修炼仙道。张三丰以修人道为炼仙道的基础，强调只要素行阴德，仁
慈悲悯，忠孝信诚，全于人道，离仙道也就自然不远了。“人能修正身心，则真精真神聚其中，大才大德出其中。”

道教神學可以說是道家思想神秘化後的宗教學說，未必完全切合，其间异同，颇值玩味。然道教既祖称老、莊，尊崇《道德經》（老子）、《南華經》（莊子）等眾多道家經典，毕竟
吸收继承了道家思想的大量内容。此外，它也受到了《易》以及阴阳家、儒家、中医养生家、佛教以及上古方仙道的影响。

道教对中国古代的政治、经济、哲学、文学、艺术、音乐、绘画、建筑、医学、药物学、养生学、气功、化学、武术、天文学、地理都产生了不同程度的影响。此外，它对于华人的思
维方式、伦理、道德、民俗、民族关系、民族心理、民族性格等各方面也有很深的影响。

「道家」與「道教」二詞，常被不加區別地使用。從歷史來看，這兩個詞指稱過很多不同的內容，也曾混為一談；現在也仍然有人主張將二者等同起來。然而，如果將道家理解為由老
子、莊子開創，並在魏晉被重新發明的哲學思想流派，將道教理解為於兩漢逐漸形成，後又有若干發展分化的宗教，那麼，雖然道教在理論上汲取了道家思想的大量要素，甚至奉老子
為教主，但是二者還是不能混為一談，也不能說道教理論就是道家思想。道教作為一種宗教，有其神仙崇拜與信仰，有教徒與組織，有一系列的宗教儀式與活動，其主要派別的傳承是
大致清楚的。道家作為一個哲學思想流派，其思想演變與代表人物應是它被解說時最重要的內容；魏晉之後道家思想的傳承演變，現在看來還是模糊而難以說清的，但它對歷代學者文
人的影響卻仍是依稀可辨的；從這個角度也可以說，狹義的「道家」指的就是先秦時代以老子、莊子為主要代表人物的哲學思想流派。

也有學者認為，道家思想與宗教或有莫大聯繫。如聞一多在《道教的精神》一文中曾指出：「我常疑心這哲學或玄學的道家思想必有一個前身，而這個前身很可能是某種富有神秘思想
的原始宗教，或更具體點講，一個巫教。這種宗教在基本性質上恐怕與後來的道教無大差別，雖則形式上盡可截然不同。這個不知名的古代宗教，我們可暫稱為古道教。」

道教神學與道家思想的異同，如：道教某些人所謂長生不老，追求成仙、神通之类，而老子並未言及。道教内部的思想本身就很复杂。也不是所有都追求长生不老，追求成仙、神通之
类。

另外道教先人認為天地人中定數代表天庭及玉皇大帝與地獄和海中世界的概念，作為天庭的附屬，也發展出了閻羅地府和龍王水晶宮的一系列神仙官員，再加上地方神仙系列如四值功
曹、山神、城隍、土地神、灶君等。古代-制定中國古代神話中的西王母、九天玄女等。中國道教信奉的神仙譜系極為繁雜。

《太平經》中“神仙”分為六等，張君房《雲笈七箋》道書中“神仙”分為十個等級，以道書來說，道教的神仙譜系中，最高為“三清”、“四御”，最低為“城隍”、“土地”。這
是經過長期演化才逐漸定型的。如媽祖、關帝、雙忠等。都因為民間信仰而納入道教的神仙。道教早期雖然不供俸神像，但為了傳播方便而開始塑造神像供俸，在大型道教宮觀中，必
有“天尊殿”（或曰“三清閣”）以及“四禦殿”，至於其他神仙，則根據道觀之歷史、地理特點而不盡相同，並合祀“三清”神像。此外，道教先人認為人身也是一個小天地，因此
人身上的各種器官，例如毛髮、五官等等也都有神靈駐守，而且還有相應的修持方法。

道教戒律是一些约束道士思想言行的准则。道教的戒律依照不同的教派，有着不同的内容。一般说来，全真派的戒律严于符箓派。戒律的内容主要有不得杀生，不得喝酒吃肉，不得偷
盗，不得邪淫等。戒律是教徒必须遵守的，而且必须有一个受戒仪式一名道士才能算作教徒。根据规则的严紧程度，戒律可以分成上品戒，中品戒，下品戒。根据戒條的多少有“三戒
”、“五戒”、“八戒”、“十戒”、“老君二十七戒”等。

道教的戒律，在吸取了佛教的一些内容和儒家三纲五常等要求的基础上，形成了一套自己特有的内容。道教的清规戒律也是随时事的变化而变化的，当与政权的法律相冲突时，会进行
适当的调整。

道教的宗教活动十分庞杂，主要分两大类，道士的自身修行（称为道术）和道教仪式，内容包括道教经法、忏法、斋、醮、符咒、禁咒、隐遁、乘蹻、驱邪、伏魔、降妖、消灾、祈禳
、房中术、神仙术、辟谷、風水堪輿、占卜等。

道士的自身修行成为道术，包括内丹，外丹，服食，房中等内容。外丹是指烧炼丹砂铅、汞等矿物以及药物，制作能够使人长生不老的丹丸。现代所謂的科学认为这些丹药大多有毒，
古人也有很多服食不當致死的例子，後來胡虜入侵殖民，很多道士戰死，秘方被失傳。造成外丹服食和配制的方法較難掌握分寸，具有一定的危險性，後世多数轉向較為保險的內丹修
煉(内丹修炼在此之前也存在)。近代陈缨宁曾经在上海从事过外丹实验，从而断定古丹书所载不虚 。外丹也被认为是现代化学的先驱。

内丹则是指通过行气，导引，呼吸吐纳，在身体里炼丹以达到长生不老的目的。外丹和内丹的用语相同，但是所指代的含义完全不同，比如把人体比喻为烧炼丹丸的炉鼎，不過理論上
還是具有相通性。古時炼丹术的传授大多师徒相承，口口相授，外人很难了解。将人体的三丹田称为“三元”是道教内丹术的说法。“混沌分后，有天地水三元之气，生成人伦，长养
万物。人亦法之，号为三焦、三丹田，以养身形，以生神气。”亦有认为“三元”指元精、元气、元神。

此外，道教还有许多道术。例如内观、守静、存思、辟谷等多种。这些被某些人归为气功，不过这种做法并不正确，因为現在說的“气功”其实只有几十年的历史，而道教修炼自黄帝
算起（《史记》中有黄帝“且战且修仙”的记载）则至少有五千年的历史。另外，蒙元滿清殖民前的道教徒都习武術。中醫理論亦大多源自道教。

道教的仪式统称为“斋醮科仪”，斋是清洁的意思，醮是指祈祷，又称为道场。道教祭祀神仙，由于认为神仙清高洁静，因此祭祀前需要沐浴更衣，不行房、不飲酒、不食肉，进行斋
戒。进行祭祀活动称为“醮”，道教仪式在发展过程中吸取了许多佛教的内容(佛教仪式在发展过程中亦吸取了许多道教的内容)。道教认为通过这些仪式可以去灾求福。占卜也是道
术的一部分，包括卜卦、抽签、测字等。此外，道教很有特色的是使用符、箓。符是用墨筆、朱砂画在黄纸上的一些符号，道教认为可以用来治病，而箓则被认为可以驱使天神。另外
，道教也认为口念禁咒，可以治病驱使鬼神，赶走野兽。这些主要都是道教道士所為修得的法术。

道教奉老子的《道德经》、庄子的《南华经》为重要的两部经典。另外，有部分学者认为道教模仿佛教的大藏经创制了道藏模板:Notetag，收集历代道家著作，不仅包括哲学
和道家理论，而且包括炼丹、养生、治病、气功等方面的著作。記載道教符錄、齋醮、科儀、修煉方法的經典主要有《正统道藏》、《道藏辑要》、《万历续道藏》等，這些典籍有對
中國古代的政治、經濟、文化與科技等產生影響。現僅存明代《正统道藏》流傳，其它版本已失傳，現存歷代道教經典多收錄於此。道教的经书数量非常庞大，各派的主要经典也各不
相同。

《周易参同契》是最早的丹经，称为丹经之祖，此外《抱朴子》也是道教丹鼎派的基本经典。《太平经》和《老子想尔注》也是道教早期的主要经典。《黄庭经》和《上清大洞真经》
则是上清经箓派的主要经典，茅山派也非常重之。《度人经》和《三皇文》则是灵宝派和三皇派的主要经典。《阴符经》和《常清静经》也是道教两部非常重要的经书，是道士必须诵
习的经书。此外，《玉皇经》和《心印妙经》也是道教徒的日常功课之一。北宋后出现了《悟真篇》、《金丹四百字》等经典。

道教太一宗主要也以符箓、斋醮、科仪、該宗以《道德经》為主要傳宗經典、另談及丹道但其歷代宗師皆長壽，傳宗至今傳至47代，其47代宗師黃元吉，寫出許多知名道教修道與
丹道经典。

明代道士冷谦是著名琴家，对音乐做出巨大贡献。
清代道士张孔山开创的琴派“川派”，对琴艺做出了巨大贡献，代表名曲《大流水》（亦称《七十二滚拂流水》、《流水》）。从某种 意义上也可以说是道教音乐。
近代道士华彦钧（俗称“瞎子阿炳”）对中国二胡艺术做出巨大贡献。

道教音樂是道教文化的重要組成部分之一道樂不僅與道教歷史同樣久遠而且秘而不傳，其旋律為古雅風格，為宗教與藝術的互相結合。道樂常見於廟宇日常早晚課誦經唱贊，各種齋醮
法事、中元普渡、大型法會等宗教活動，或者信徒在各種喪葬、祭拜及日常禮神儀式上播放以求慰藉，也為道士、法師必備科儀經樂，亦常於廟宇、素食店、茶藝館、宗教藝品店日常
播放，修道士平時也常用於靜坐冥想、修練氣功丹道、提昇心靈境界。

自50年代開始，即有業餘音樂家在收集、整理、研究道教音樂，各學術刊物的專論及學術專著開始陸續出現「道教音樂」；後來有專業音樂家將「道教音樂」搬上了舞台，並至東亞
國家巡迴演出。道教音樂的藝術表演活動於是慢慢被社會認同接受，而部分道教宮觀有從事這種演示活動的組織–「道樂團」。1988年8月22日，北京白雲觀正式成立了「白雲
觀道教音樂團」，並首次在北京音樂廳舉行了集合性演出。之後大陸各地道教協會等亦相繼成立了道樂團，其中蘇州玄妙觀、北京白雲觀等宮觀的道樂團還多次應邀到英國、比利時、
新加坡等國作專場道教音樂演出。

1996年，由香港蓬瀛仙館主辦的香港道樂團正式成立，香港道樂團也是歷屆道教音樂匯演的組織策劃者之一。「首屆道教音樂匯演」於2001年11月在香港演出，由香港蓬瀛
仙館、香港道樂團與香港中文大學宗教系、香港中文大學音樂系聯合主辦。道教音樂匯演主要是唱誦平時在宮觀裏誦經說法的經韵，配合走五方、行八卦、轉太極等身伐動作；亦有地
方特色的道曲；其中武當山道教武術音樂團表演的「武當仙樂神功」是創意性的節目，該節目將武當山道教音樂與武當山拳、劍及功夫結合于一體，道樂中穿插武功，武功伴隨著道樂
，以道樂再搭配中國功夫方式動靜結合；也有演奏道長阿炳的著名作品《二泉映月》，匯演還有表演分別具有江南、东北及香港地方特色的道曲，令觀眾們可感受到道教音樂的可體驗
不同風格且豐富之道曲；匯演中特色節目還由東道主成都青羊宮道樂團表演，該團的表演特點是在樂隊中使用了編鐘、古琴等古樂器，使用古老的樂器傳達歷史悠久的道教音樂。

第二屆道教音樂匯演在2002年6月在台北演出。第三屆道教音樂匯演於2003年3月18日在北京民族文化宮大劇院舉行，由中國道教協會、香港蓬瀛仙館聯合主辦。第四屆道
教音樂匯演於2004年3月7日在新加坡嘉龍劇院舉行。第五屆道教音樂匯演2005年5月於在廣州星海音樂廳舉行，該匯演創下參演團體和表演人數歷屆最多的紀錄。第六屆道
教音樂匯演於2006年8月26日在成都藝術中心嬌子音樂廳舉行。

大陸中國道教協會和臺灣中華道教總會為了弘揚道教文化，展示道教音樂，在經過協商和籌備，於2005年7月底8月在臺灣舉行海峽兩岸道教音樂會，以「蓬萊仙韵頌太平」作為
主題。

历史上还有正一宗（祖師张道陵）、全真南宗（祖師張伯端）、全真北宗（祖師王重阳）、真大宗（祖師张清志）、太一宗（祖師莫洞一)五大宗之分法，與天师道、全真道、灵宝道
、清微道四大派的分法。还有道德、先天、灵宝、正一、清微、净明、玉堂、天心八派的说法。

近现代道教就纯宗教方面分之，主要分为五个派别——积善、经典、丹鼎、符箓、占验。而最有影响的则是符箓派和丹鼎派，前者主张以符咒等方术治病驱鬼，后者主张炼金丹求仙，
分外丹与内丹二脉。

明朝以后，道教主要分为「正一道」和「全真道」與「太一道」三大派别，其他宗派全部归纳到这三个宗派之下。现在北京的白云观藏有《诸真宗派总簿》，所列道派系谱共有八十七
派，实际上有些只是系谱的续字，不是独立一派。另外據教內所傳典籍，應為36天教及72地教，总共应108教派。

道教在中國現今宗派為全真宗為主流。而正一宗在中國大陸只是支脈，其發源地為江西龍虎山。以太上老君（即道德天尊）为教主，也就是老子。在台灣，以太上老君所代表道教宗派
為道教太一宗，門派奉太上老君為祖師。而正一宗奉祀祖師為張道陵天師，以上為台灣兩大道教宗派。

道教的宗教建築泛稱為宮觀，是比較晚的事，至早也早不過唐。考其形成和演變的歷史，可以看到它們是適應道教組織產生和發展的需要，而產生和發展的。現在一般都認為，早期道
教的宗教建築主要是靖（靜、靜室）和治，另有些道室名廬，治中亦可稱為館。所謂靖或靜，係奉道之家所設立的靜室，意在與家中其他之處隔離。「奉道之家，靖室是致誠之所。其
外別絕，不連他屋。其中清虛，不雜餘物。開閉門戶，不妄觸突。灑握精肅，常若神居。唯置香爐、香燈、章案、書刀四物而已。」[1]可見，它最初出現就是為區分聖與凡，道士
與一般居民，奉道與俗事的界限而立。

三元节是道教的大庆日子。三元節，就是「三官大帝」的誕辰，并以天官生日為上元节，为天官赐福之日，要舉行祈福法事；地官生日為中元节，为地官赦罪之日，要普渡孤魂；水官
生日為下元节，为水官解厄之日，請神明為運勢不好的人消災解難。唐代三元节由皇帝下敕天下诸州禁屠三日。以夏历正月十五为上元节，七月十五为中元节，十月十五为下元节。

道教中一些宗派都师徒相传一些武术和气功，例如武术中很出名的武当派，据说就是武当山上的许多道士传承的武术。道教的武术也和许多武术不同，讲究圆柔、后发制人，充分体现
了道教的教理。其中像太极拳这样的简单武术套路，已经逐渐成为人们的日常健身活动。道教气功也是中国气功中的一大流派，全真道的修炼方法很多就是气功，对气功的探索和发展
，其贡献很大。

道教的养生术还继承和发展了中国传统医学《黄帝内经》中经络学等方面内容。此外，许多道教徒研习医术，对于中医学发展颇有贡献，如葛洪、陶弘景、孙思邈等人，于中医药皆有
所建树。

历史上很多重要的文化人物都是道教徒。晋代书圣王羲之一家笃信正一道。唐代的大诗人李白也是位虔诚的道教徒，曾经游历各地，求仙访道，甚至炼过丹、受过道箓。这段经历给他
的个性、诗歌创作乃至一生的际遇都产生了很重要的影响。李白受召入长安，受到唐玄宗等许多的道士和信仰道教朋友的推荐。寻仙过程中，他游遍五岳，给他带来大量的素材。他的
诗歌中也常常出现“仙人”、“羽化”等意念。唐太宗在老子的家鄉建了「太上老君廟」；唐高宗則尊老子為「太上玄元皇帝」，認為老子是李唐宗世的祖先。唐朝君主有自稱是老子
的後代子孫，還遵奉老子為始祖，並且立祠祭祀，又對老子追封帝號，同時明定朝廷官員都要修習《道德經》，並且列《道德經》為當時科舉考試的範圍。

中国四大古典文学名著之一的《西游记》虽然讲述的是唐僧等四人去西天取经的故事，但全书中使用了大量道教专有的概念如心猿、意马、姹女、元神等，还构筑了一个以玉皇大帝为
核心的道教神祇、神官系统。书中也出现了很多道教人物，有些竟然多被荒唐的寫成反面角色。

而完全以道教为核心的最著名小说则要数《封神演义》了。书中讲述的商周战争，裏面提到與道教並立的兩個宗教闡教和截教的誤斗。书中出现的各路仙神和法寶等，属于闡教截教道
教系统。

“天皇”在中國道教中，是表示北極星的神祇。在唐朝时期，唐高宗曾使用天皇大帝称号，与天后武则天并称二圣。高宗下旨令各地廣建修道觀，並且把自己的女兒送進道觀當女道士
。也就是說道教在唐太宗與唐高宗的強力推行，可說是已成為唐朝的國教。

台灣道教基本上隨著早期的漢人移民而來到台灣
，從清領時期就一直享有高度宗教自由的民間社會，經過日治時期統治仍蓬勃發展。日治前期，日本政府施行「舊慣溫存」政策，即尊重台灣舊慣，不干涉傳統宗教。日治後期，由於
採皇民化政策，企圖改變台灣人民思想，日治時代的台灣，道廟非常之多，且有民間教團在守護與維護人民安全，但道廟中的民團會抵制日本政府，所以採皇民化政策大力強制道教改
採佛教信仰，此舉導致台灣現今佛道不分，但是道教仍呈熱烈的蓬勃發展風貌遍佈全台。戰後，戒嚴的年代，國民政府禁止集會遊行，因此民間只能以「慶祝國慶」、「慶祝總統、副
總統就職X週年」等名目向政府機關申請，才得以順利舉辦廟會。以道教法師來說台灣早期山線都是紅頭海線才是道士，台灣清代已有福建道教閭山派，與南部靈寶派與正一派等，民
國60年代成立道教會與道教太一宗掘起，台灣道教產生變化，不過百姓雖不知道教體系，百姓的心中一直都是主要道士、法師及造醮等觀念與習俗更是深植民心。這裡面，雖然科儀
與中國其他地方不盡相同，道教的傳承一直在台灣發展著。

道教現為台灣第一大宗教。中華民國內政部於2000年1月28日宣佈訂農曆1月1日為道教節，屬國定假日，是台灣諸多宗教中以宗教為名稱節並訂於法律中之之唯一宗教，也是
現代道教史上的大事 。

早在1796年前，在新加坡建立道教庙宇顺天宫。1990年，新加坡道教总会成立。又邀请中国道教协会副会长黄信阳道长等全真派道士多次前往新加坡开办道士培训班、主持法
事。同时还同中国大陆的正一派道观以及港台的道教团体开展广泛的联系与合作。自1996年开始，于每年农历二月十五日举行的道教节。1996年开始，道教徒即积极参与由新
加坡共和国九大宗教所组成的新加坡宗教联谊理事会的祈福和祷告会及其他活动。二十一世纪初，修建起富丽堂皇的三清宫，主殿供奉道祖三清及真武大帝、正一天师，左殿供奉全真
道吕洞宾、王重阳、丘处机三位祖师，右殿供奉孔圣人，体现全真道“三教合一”的宗旨。新加坡道教学院，和三清道教图书馆，在2008年在底在三清宫正式成立。道教学院为新
加坡培养年轻的、有宗教情操、有文化涵养、能够执行道教科仪的道教工作人员。

中國道教是否傳入日本，日本學術界亦有兩種相反的意見。一種是認為日本古代政府拒絕道教的傳人，淡海三船的《唐大和尚東征傳》及《古事類苑》和《群書類聚》中都有明記模板
:Notetag。另一種意見認為，「道教作為宗教，其教典、道士、道觀等成體系的組織形態，並沒有傳來日本，關於這一點，目前確實無史料可證。但是道教作為思想給日本以
影響，可以說已是難以否定的事實」。道教在日本的傳播，根本沒有帶有建立道觀和道士佈教等形式的教團道教傳到日本來。但是，早在公元前2世紀前後，道家思想藉由漢字從漢字
文化圈的朝鮮半島傳播到了日本。

到公元5世紀前後的應神天皇、仁德年間，又有大量渡來人來自以半島為中心的那些地區和中國的長江三角洲地區，他們帶來大陸文化。在奈良、平安朝時代，日本用類似民間習俗的
『托盤』，從來自朝鮮半島或中國大陸的歸化人以及隨遣隋使、遣唐使去中國的留學生和留學僧帶回來的道德經典中，接受了漢字成語或知識，部分地接受了唐宋時期盛行的道教信仰
，形成了一種道教形態，而江戶時代的道教形態與此不同，到了江戶時代，日本接受的是禪宗僧侶們帶來的、明代盛行的『善書』等民眾道教。這些『善書』類是從日本人群眾性的國
民道德意識之『托盤』較多的地方開始接受的，其中也有幕府和大名的支持。由於印刷術的發達，這些『善書』不斷出版發行，一般民眾也容易看到。因此，對日本一般社會的影響也
與以往不同。

而早在大約在七世紀，道教神仙長生思想和方術即已傳往日本。日本留學生曾在中國學習道教方技，並把道教經典帶回日本。從平安時代起，道教守庚申的信仰在日本頗為流行。卑弥
呼信仰的鬼道模板:Notetag与日本神道一部分来源是道教。而《古事記》、《日本書紀》亦有記載的古代道教思想，日本最早史書中主要闡述這兩種所提到的「常世」、「觀
」和「天皇」幾個術語。「常世」的解釋是「神仙的秘區」，產生於日本，為神仙鄉的意思。飛鳥時代的天武天皇因喜歡道教而使用天皇作為君主的尊號。日本的修验道入山修行前念
的真言（臨兵斗者皆陳列在前）与抱朴子中内篇第四登涉篇的（臨兵斗者皆陳列前行）几乎一样。

琉球人的文化受中国和日本本土的影响较大。从宗教上看，琉球人中既有信奉佛教和琉球神道的，也有不少道教的信徒。不少道教神祇如媽祖、關公等在琉球都有不少信眾，並被琉球
神道吸收。

朝鮮道教於7世紀在朝鮮半島出現。在624年（唐朝武德七年）高句麗榮留王曾請奏唐高祖希望傳授道教教義。唐高祖李淵於武德七年，遺前刑部尚書沈叔安往冊建武為上柱國遼東
郡王高麗王，仍將天尊像及道士往彼，為之講老子，其王及道俗等觀聽者數千人模板:Notetag。翌年，高句麗榮留王又遣人人唐學佛老之法。

但是此時期道教在朝鮮半島尚未形成教團模板:Notetag，王室為中心的人們主要把它視為保護國家的宗教，在民間老百姓把道教視同民間信仰結合起來，被融进民间信仰或其
他宗教模板:Notetag中而逐渐沒落無所知，且人們並不認為民間信仰的道教是一種外來宗教。道教從中國傳入朝鮮以前，朝鮮就存在神仙思想、山嶽信仰、靈星信仰、地方習
俗性民間信仰、咒術、天文、占星術、讖緯預言術等，認為這些宗教文化形態與中國的道教具有同一性或類似性模板:Notetag；朝鮮不存在像中國道教那樣的完整的道教形態
；不可把朝鮮文化中道教文化要素當作一種外來文化看待，強調要從主體性的立場上研究朝鮮文化中的道教性質。但不管如何，已有史料可證明道教在古代朝鮮的傳播及其影響。

最早期道教傳入越南最早是在東晉末年，五斗米道孫恩在江南發動起義失敗後，其妹夫盧循率部逃至交州。而越南人李脫幫助盧循進攻交州府城，失敗後赴水自盡。吳朝以後，越南在
五百年中，又先後建立過丁朝、前黎、李朝、陳朝、胡朝和後陳等朝代。在此期間，中國和越南的政治、經濟和文化的交往十分密切，此時道教隨著移民而傳入。

丁朝先皇太平二年（中國北宋開寶四年，971年）曾經給佛道二教的領袖頒授官階品級，「道士鄧玄光授崇真威儀」。傳稱丁先皇在一次起兵時，還到今寧平省的「天尊洞」道觀，
禮拜神明。後平定天下，遂改「天尊洞」為「安國祠」。黎朝大行皇帝在興統四年（中國北宋淳化三年，992年），曾經「宣華山道士陳先生詣闕」。陳先生當指陳摶。但是根據中
國的史書，陳摶似乎並未到過越南。越南史書的記載至少說明，陳摶盛名遍傳天下，黎朝大行皇帝欲召而不得。李朝崇信三教，李太祖在位時，就興建道教宮觀太清宮，詔度道士。太
祖之子李太宗登基時，道士陳慧龍還為其造「天命」，得寵信，獲賜御衣。李神宗天彰寶嗣三年（中國南宋紹興五年，1135年），神宗曾經赴五嶽觀，「慶成金銀三尊像」，據稱
這是越南史書上有關越南道觀造三清神像的首次記載。

越南廣泛流傳對真武帝君的信仰。真武帝君，即玄天上帝模板:Notetag。玄天上帝，受到宋、元、明等歷代王朝的封誥。越南的北部和中部有許多奉祀真武大帝的宮觀和神祠
。河內市區北部的西湖風景區就有真武觀。真武觀，又稱鎮武觀，也稱龜聖祠。

16世紀以後，越南的南方逐漸北開發。後黎阮氏政權充分利用了許多為逃避滿清統治而到達的前明朝官員以及民眾，獎勵開墾養殖。以後，不斷有來自福建、廣東、廣西等地的華僑
移居越南南方。在胡志明市等西南部的華人聚居區與華人聚居的主要城市，一些華人的會館和道教宮觀仍然在繼續活動。由廣東廣州來的華人修建的穗城會館，創建於道光八年（18
28年）以前。會館有正殿供奉天後聖母、龍母娘娘、金花娘娘，偏殿供奉關帝等。由於穗城會館供奉的主要是女神，所以被越南民眾稱為「女廟」。

由廣東潮州來的華人修建的義安會館，創建於1902年（光緒二十八年）以前。會館有正殿供奉關聖帝君，同時奉祀福德老爺、文昌帝君、財帛星君以及天后聖母等。由於義安會館
供奉的主要是男神，所以被越南民眾稱為「男廟」。

早在16世纪，老子的《道德经》就被西方人译成西方文字，17世纪以后，借助西方的商船往返，顺着西方传教士的足迹，《道德经》逐步由中国传入欧洲，西方人把《道德经》翻
译成了拉丁文、法文、德文、英文等文字，老子思想逐渐传遍欧洲大陆。据说德国哲学家莱布尼兹最初正是根据伏羲、黄老的阴阳学说提出了二进制思想，并给太极阴阳八卦起了一个
西洋名字“辩证法”，当然，这种说法并没有得到有效证实。几百年来，《道德经》的西文译本总数近500种，涉及17种欧洲文字，在译成外国文字的世界文化名著发行量上，《
圣经》排第一，《道德经》排第二。

道教的理想世界不同于佛教的涅槃，也不同于亞伯拉罕諸教模板:Notetag的天國。道教的理想世界有两种，一种是世俗的，一种是宗教的。道教的理想世界是希望世界成为一
个公平、和平的世界，没有灾祸、没有战争。而宗教的理想世界则是“仙境”，道教追求得道成仙，这样就能超脱生死，在仙境中过仙人的生活。不同于其它宗教的是，道教并不认为
人死后才能到达仙境，而是认为人的形体通过一些形式的锻炼可以长生不死，成仙以后也可以一样生活在普通人的世界里，作“活神仙”，也可以到仙境中去生活。但是由于达到成仙
的境界非常不容易，因此后来才出现了“屍解”等方式。部分風景秀麗的地方由於適合修煉而被譽為人間仙境，例如所谓的“洞天福地”就是其中一些代表性的地方。

许多宗教都认为人的寿命是不能改变的，然而道教不这样认为，有一句话“我命在我不在天”，另外，道教作为一个多神教模板:Notetag，相信万物有灵，甚至人体的各种器
官都有神灵。亞伯拉罕諸教教义认为人生充满了不幸或者罪孽，认为死后灵魂才有可能得救。然而道教却认为生活在世界上是一件美好的事情，死亡才是痛苦的，因而道教追求的是“
长生久视”、长生不死。也因此有许多养生的方法，例如气功等在道教得到了发扬。

道教對人生大體上總是保持積極的、正面的態度。這是道教與其他宗教的最大不同之處。基督教認為人生來就帶有原罪，人生下來就要贖罪，佛教認為人生是苦，道教則是通過修煉達
到不死，長生不老脫離對死亡的恐懼。而道教和佛教和的最主要的區別就是對待生和死的態度。道教傳遞信眾，人應該要怎麼走在現在人生之路上；通過修煉達到不死，長生不老。佛
教追求的目標是「涅槃」，才能脫離生死輪迴。佛教認為，人生是苦，生是苦，死是苦，而且這種苦是沒有盡頭的一個循環往復、不到頭的生死輪迴中。只有追求實現涅槃，才能脫離
生死輪迴。佛教著重在「覺悟」模板:Notetag，並探究過去之所生與未來之所往的輪迴，這是佛教與道教不同之處。

道教和佛教作为中国的主要宗教，两者在相互競爭中又互相吸收，使其更适用中国本土文化的需要。佛教傳入中國后，大大吸收了儒教道教的思想，仪轨，祭祀等，使之变为适合中国
的宗教，现今中国的大乘佛教的小部分科仪，可以说就是道教的一种翻版。而且道教的许多经文是參考佛教经文编写，许多仪式也參考了佛教如早晚课，施食等．對佛教的學習，最明
顯的是全真教的出家制度与全真三堂大戒。如道教的萨祖焰口是明清时期的道士模仿元代喇嘛翻译的瑜伽焰口编写,也可以说道教的焰口是佛教的翻版,不然民间就不会说道无焰口,
佛无拜斗.

汉桓帝延熹九年（166年）襄楷所上奏章中有“或言老子出玉门关入夷狄为浮屠”的说法。汉代《太平经》提到“老子往西越八十年”。《三国志·魏书》提到“浮屠所载，与中国
老子经相出入，盖以老子西出关，过西域，至天竺教胡，及浮屠弟子合二十有九。”歷史上最為知名是堅信老子化胡並大力推廣之代表教派以唐朝國師為首之樓觀道。不过历史的证据
证明老子与喬達摩·悉達多是同时代的人，而且历史记载老子是由函谷关西入秦国在秦地终老，玉门关是汉代才有的．

一貫道雖然名稱有包含了「道」並以宣扬儒、釋、道、耶、回五教合一的教義結合。中心思想以「理天法」取代道教的「氣天法」，且不再煉丹，完全趨向儒教化。一貫道的中心主神
是明明上帝，宣教場地稱為「佛堂」，因此本質上與正統道教有很大不同。

近年来，道教在世界很多地区得到了发展。如1995年12月，英国道教协会正式在伦敦成立。这是欧洲最早成立的道教组织。1999年以来，中国著名道士田诚阳，赴西班牙讲
学传道，教授当地信众。2001年5月联合当地弟子创立道教协会，同年的冬至,
欧洲第一座道观清静宫落成，得到西班牙政府正式确认，在西班牙取得与天主教平等的合法地位。 这是道教传入欧洲大陆的一个里程碑 。
当前欧洲地区的道教信徒在不断增加中。

在美国，亚利桑那州有一座中孚道观，纽约有天後宫，旧金山市有紫根阁，
夏威夷有太玄道观。2007年，美国道教访问团一行在中美文化促进会会长曾永祥先生的带领下，对道教圣地武当山进行了参观、访问。美国道教协会拟筹捐2000万美金，在美
国洛基山脉按1：1的比例修建武当山紫霄宫道观。

本山寿星宫是韩国唯一的供奉道教神的庙。座落于韩国蔚山市蔚州区温阳面外光里429号,
成立于1991年10月,供奉道教神寿星-南极长生大帝。住持李福顺，生于1946年。七岁起，她经常梦中见到一位手持拐杖的白发老人，百思不得其解。三十岁后便到韩国各
地寻找，但没有任何发现。后来辗转到了台湾，在台北博物馆的大厅找到了梦中的白发老人。才知白发老人是道教"福、禄、寿"三星中的寿星。经台湾中华道教会张柽先生介绍、拜
台北全真仙坛张络传法师为师，赐道号金鸾，正式步入道门，迎请寿星回韩国，成立了寿星宫。



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vahvuhswhbiedkez

Vahvuhswhbiedkez (lahdingh cihmeh:O'zbek tili naeuz O'zbekcha, sihlijwh cihmeh:
Ўзбек тили naeuz Ўзбекча; alhboz cihmeh: اوزبیک تیلی naeuz اوزبیکچه) gvihaeuj
duhcez yijcuz, dwg Vuhsehbiedkezsehdanj guenfueng yijyenz. Miz iek seiq cien
fanh boux yungh Vahvuhswhbiedkez guh vahcoj. Vahvuhswhbiedkez gvi doengnamz
duhcez yijyenz, caeuq Vahveizvuzwj doxlumj raixcaix.

Turkic speakers have probably settled in the Amu-Darya, Syr-Darya and Zeravshan
river basins since at least AD600–700, gradually ousting or assimilating the
speakers of Eastern Iranian languages who previously inhabited Soghdiana,
Bactria and Chorasmia. The first Turkic dynasty in the region was that of the
Karakhanids in the 9th–12th centuries AD, who were a confederation of Karluks
(Qarluq), Chigil, Yaghma and other tribes.

Uzbek is a language which can be considered the direct descendant or a latter
form of Chagatay, the language of great Turkic Central Asian literary
development in the realm of Chagatai Khan, Timur (Tamerlane), and the Timurids.
The language was championed by Mir Ali-Sher Nawa'i in the 15th and 16th
centuries. Ultimately based on the Qarluq variant of the Turkic languages, it
contained large numbers of Persian and Arabic loanwords. By the 19th century it
was rarely used for literary composition.

The term "Uzbek" as applied to language has meant different things at different
times. Prior to 1921 "Uzbek" and "Sart" were considered to be different
dialects; "Uzbek" was a vowel-harmonised Kipchak dialect spoken by descendants
of those who arrived in Transoxiana with Shaybani Khan in the 16th century, who
lived mainly around Bukhara and Samarkand, although the Turkic spoken in
Tashkent was also vowel-harmonised; "Sart" was a Qarluq dialect spoken by the
older settled Turkic populations of the region in the Ferghana Valley and the
Kashka-Darya region, and in some parts of what is now the Samarkand Province; it
contained a heavier admixture of Persian and Arabic, and did not use
vowel-harmony. In Khiva Sarts spoke a form of highly Persianised Oghuz Turkic.
After 1921 the Soviet regime abolished the term Sart as derogatory, and decreed
that henceforth the entire settled Turkic population of Turkestan would be known
as Uzbeks, even though many had no Uzbek tribal heritage. The standard written
language that was chosen for the new republic in 1924, however, despite the
protests of Uzbek Bolsheviks such as Faizullah Khojaev, was not
pre-revolutionary "Uzbek" but the "Sart" language of the Samarkand region. All
three dialects continue to exist within modern, spoken Uzbek.

In the CIS countries, there are about 24.7 million people who speak dialects of
Uzbek. In Uzbekistan, 21 million people speak Uzbek as their native language.
There are about 1.2 million speakers in Tajikistan, 1 million in Afghanistan,
550,096 in Kyrgyzstan, 332,017 in Kazakhstan, and 317,333 in Turkmenistan.
According to the 2004 census, about 14,5000模板:Clarify people in Xinjiang in
China speak Uzbek. Because the Uzbeks in Xinjiang are so close to the Uyghur
people, who form an ethnic plurality there, Uzbeks are assimilated by Uyghurs..

Before 1928, the Uzbek language, like most Central Asian languages, was written
in various forms of the Arabic script (Yana imla) by the literate population.
Between 1928 and 1940, as part of comprehensive programs to educate (and
politically influence) Uzbek people, who for the first time now had their own
cartographically delineated (administrative) region, Uzbek writing was switched
to Latin script (Yanalif; a proposal for the latinization of Yana imla was
already developed in 1924). The latinization of Uzbek was carried out in the
context of latinization of all Turkic languages, and would not have happened if
other Turkic languages had not been Latinized.

In 1940, Uzbek was switched to Cyrillic script under Joseph Stalin. Until 1992,
Uzbek continued to be written using a Cyrillic alphabet almost everywhere, but
now in Uzbekistan the Latin script has been officially re-introduced, although
the use of Cyrillic is still widespread. The deadline in Uzbekistan for making
this transition has been repeatedly changed. The latest deadline was 2005, but
was shifted once again to provide a few more years.

Already education in many areas of Uzbekistan is in the Latin script, and in
2001 the Latin script began to be used for coins. Since 2004 some official
websites have switched over to using the Latin script when writing in Uzbek.
Most street signs are also in the new Latin script.

In the Xinjiang province of China, Uzbek has no official orthography. Some
speakers write using the Cyrillic script, while others write using the Uyghur
script 模板:Which?, as that is the language they have used when they went to
school.模板:Citation needed



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liuz_Siujboh

Liuz Siujboh (Sawgun:刘晓波, seng youq 1955 nienz 12 nyied 28 hauh), Cunghgoz
vwnzyoz bihbingzgya, cozgya, gyausou caeuq yinzgienz hozdunggya, de ngawz
Cunghgoz cwngci gaijgwz caueq Cunghgung duzcaiz roengzmuq. Seizneix de youq guh
bouxfamh cwngci.

Liuz Siujboh youq 2003 nienz daengj 2007 nienz dang Duzliz cunghvwnz bizvei
cujsiz. Coengz cungh 1990 nienzdaih haihij, de lij dwg Minzcuj cunghgoz cabceiq
cungjbien. 2008 nienz 12 nyied 8 hauh, Liuz Siujboh aen'vih canhgya ciemdingh 08
yencangh gwn laengz. 2009 nienz 6 nyied 23 hauh gwn gaemh, coihmingz dwg
yoekfeiz diemhfuz guekgya cingqcienz. dingh hingz 8 nienz.

Liu was born in Changchun, Jilin, in 1955 to an intellectual family. In 1969,
during the Down to the Countryside Movement, Liu's father took him to Horqin
Right Front Banner, Inner Mongolia. After he finished middle school in 1974, he
was sent to the countryside to work on a farm in Jilin.

In 1977, Liu was admitted to the Department of Chinese Literature at Jilin
University, where he created a poetry group known as "The Innocent Hearts" (Chi
Zi Xin) with six schoolmates. In 1982, he graduated with B.A. in literature
before being admitted as a research student at the Department of Chinese
Literature at Beijing Normal University. In 1984, he received an M.A. in
literature and became a teacher at the same department. That year, he married
Tao Li, with whom he had a son named Liu Tao in 1985.

In 1986, Liu started his doctoral study program and published his literary
critiques at various magazines. He became well known as a "dark horse" for his
radical opinions and sharp comments on the official doctrines and establishments
to shock both of the literary and ideological circles, thus termed as "Liu
Xiaobo Shock" or "Liu Xiaobo Phenomenon". In 1987, his first book, Criticism of
the Choice: Dialogues with Li Zehou, was published and became a bestseller
non-fiction. It comprehensively criticised the Chinese tradition of Confucianism
and posed a frank challenge to Li Zehou, a rising ideological star who had a
strong influence on young intellectuals in China at the time.

In June 1988, he received Ph.D. in literature. His doctoral thesis, Aesthetic
and Human Freedom, passed the examination unanimously and was published as his
second book. In the same year he became a lecturer at the same department. He
soon became a visiting scholar at several universities, including Columbia
University, the University of Oslo, and the University of Hawaii. He returned
home as the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests broke out. This year saw also the
publication of his third book, The Fog of Metaphysics, a comprehensive review on
Western philosophies. Soon, all of his works were banned.模板:Citation needed

In a 1988 interview with Hong Kong's Liberation Monthly (now known as Open
Magazine), Liu was asked what it would take for China to realize a true
historical transformation. He replied:

Liu admitted in 2006 that the response was extemporaneous, although he did not
intend to take it back, as it represented "an extreme expression of his longheld
belief." The quote was nonetheless used against him. He has commented, "Even
today [in 2006], radical patriotic 'angry youth' still frequently use these
words to paint me with 'treason'."

Known for his pro-West stance, Liu once stated in an interview: "Modernization
means whole-sale westernization, choosing a human life is choosing Western way
of life. Difference between Western and Chinese governing system is humane vs
in-humane, there's no middle ground... Westernization is not a choice of a
nation, but a choice for the human race"

During the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests, he was in the United States but
decided to return to China to join the movement. He was later named as one of
the "four junzis of Tiananmen Square" for persuading students to leave the
square and thus saving hundreds of lives.

In his 1996 article titled "Lessons from the Cold War", Liu argues that "The
free world led by the US fought almost all regimes that trampled on human rights
… The major wars that the US became involved in are all ethically defensible."
He has defended U.S. policies in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict, which he
thinks is the fault of the "provocateur" Palestinians.

Liu also published a 2004 article in support of Bush's war on Iraq, titled
"Victory to the Anglo-American Freedom Alliance", in which he praised the
U.S.-led post-Cold War conflicts as "best examples of how war should be
conducted in a modern civilization." He predicted "a free, democratic and
peaceful Iraq will emerge." During the 2004 US presidential election, Liu again
praised Bush for his war effort against Iraq and condemned Democratic Party
candidate John Kerry for not sufficiently supporting the wars in which the U.S.
was then involved. He commented on Islamism that, "a cul­ture and (reli­gious)
sys­tem that pro­duced this kind of threat (Islamic fundamentalism), must be
extremely intol­er­ant and blood-thirsty." On Israel, he said "with­out
America’s pro­tec­tion, the long per­se­cuted Jews who faced exter­mi­na­tion
dur­ing World War II, prob­a­bly would again be drowned by the Islamic world's
hatred."

On 27 April 1989, Liu returned to Beijing and immediately and actively supported
the popular movement. When the army looked set violently eject from Tiananmen
Square the students who persistently occupied the Square to challenge the
government and army enforcing the martial law, he initiated a four-man three-day
hunger strike on 2 June. Later referred to as the "Tiananmen Four Gentlemen
Hunger Strike", the action was to earn the trust from the students. He requested
that the government and the students abandon the ideology of class struggle and
to adopt a new kind of political culture for dialogue and compromise. Although
it was too late to prevent the massacre from occurring beyond the Square
starting from the night of 3 June, he and his colleagues successfully negotiated
with the student leaders and the army commander to let all the several thousand
students withdraw peacefully from the Square, thus avoiding a possible bloodshed
in a much larger scale.

On 6 June, Liu was arrested and detained in Qincheng Prison for his alleged role
in the movement, and three months later was expelled from the Beijing Normal
University. The government's media issued numerous publications which labelled
him a "mad dog" and "black hand" because he had allegedly incited and
manipulated the student movement to overthrow the government and socialists. His
publications were banned, including his fourth book in press, Going Naked Toward
God. In Taiwan however, his first and third books were republished with some
additions as Criticism of the Choice: Dialogues with Leading Thinker LI Zehou
(1989), and the two-volume Mysteries of Thought and Dreams of Mankind (1990).

In January 1991, 19 months since his arrest, Liu Xiaobo was convicted on the
offence of "counter-revolutionary propaganda and incitement" but exempted from
criminal punishment for his "major meritorious action" for having avoided the
possibly bloody confrontation at Tiananmen Square. After his release, he was
divorced and eventually his ex-wife and son immigrated to the US. He resumed his
writing, mostly on human rights and political issues though he has not been
allowed to publish in Mainland China. In 1992, he published in Taiwan his first
book after his imprisonment, The Monologues of a Doomsday’s Survivor, a
controversial memoir with his confessions and political criticism on the popular
movement in 1989.

In January 1993, Liu was invited to visit Australia and the US for the
interviews in the documentary film Gate of Heavenly Peace. Although many of his
friends suggested that he take refuge abroad, Liu returned China in May 1993 and
continued his freelance writing.

On 18 May 1995, the police took Liu into custody for launching a petition
campaign on the eve of the sixth anniversary of June 4 massacre, calling on the
government to reassess the event and to initiate political reform. He was held
under residential surveillance in the suburbs of Beijing for 9 months. He was
released in February 1996 but arrested again on 8 October for an October Tenth
Declaration, co-authored by him and another prominent dissident Wang Xizhe,
mainly on Taiwan issue that advocated the peaceful unification to oppose Chinese
Communist Party's forceful treats toward the island. He was ordered to serve
three years of re-education through labor on "disturbing public order” for that
statement. In the same year, he married Liu Xia.

After his release on 7 October 1999, Liu Xiaobo resumed his freelance writing.
However, it is reported that the government built a sentry station next to his
home and his phone calls and internet connections were tapped.

In 2000, he published in Taiwan A Nation That Lies to Conscience, a 400-paged
political criticism. Also published, in Hong Kong, was Selection of Poems, a
450-paged collection of the poems as correspondences between him and his wife
during his imprisonment; it was co-authored by Liu and his wife. The last of
three books which he published during the year was in Mainland China, titled The
Beauty Offers Me Drug: Literary Dialogues between Wang Shuo and Lao Xia, a
250-paged collection of literary critiques co-authored by a popular young writer
and by himself under his unknown penname of "Lao Xiao". In the same year, Liu
participated in founding the Independent Chinese PEN Centre and was elected to
its board of directors as well as its president in November 2003, re-elected two
years later. In 2007, he did not seek for the re-election of the president but
hold his position of the board member until detained by the police in December
2008.

In 2004, when he started to write a Human Rights Report of China at home, his
computer, letters and documents were confiscated by the government. He once
said, "at Liu Xia's [Liu's wife] birthday, her best friend brought two bottles
of wine to [my home] but was blocked by the police from coming in. I ordered a
[birthday] cake and the police also rejected the man who delivered the cake to
us. I quarreled with them and the police said, "it is for the sake of your
security. It has happened many bomb attacks in these days." Those measures were
loosened until 2007, prior to the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games.

In January 2005, following the death of former Chinese Premier Zhao Ziyang, who
showed sympathy to protesters of the student demonstration in 1989, Liu was
immediately put under house arrest for two weeks before realizing the death of
Zhao. In the same year, he published two more books in the US, Future of Free
China Exists in Civil Society, and Single-Blade Poisonous Sword: Criticism of
Chinese Nationalism.

His writing is considered subversive by the Chinese Communist Party, and his
name is censored. He has called for multi-party elections, free markets,
advocated values of freedom, supported separation of powers and urged the
governments to be accountable for its wrongdoings. When not in prison, he has
been the subject of government monitoring and put under house arrest during
sensitive times.

Liu's human rights work has received international recognition. In 2004,
Reporters Without Borders awarded him the Fondation de France Prize as a
defender of press freedom.

Liu Xiaobo actively participated in the writing of and, along with more than
three hundred Chinese citizens, signed Charter 08. The Charter is a manifesto
released on 10 December 2008 to coincide with the 60th anniversary of the
adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It was written in the
style of the Czechoslovak Charter 77, calling for more freedom of expression,
human rights, more democratic elections, for privatizing state enterprises and
land and for economic liberalism. As of September 2010, the Charter has
collected over 10,000 signatures.

Two days before the official release of the Charter, late in the evening of 8
December 2008, Liu was taken into custody by the police, as was Zhang Zuhua,
another scholar and Charter 08 signatory. According to Zhang, the two were
detained on suspicion of gathering signatures to the Charter. While Liu was
detained in solitary confinement, he was forbidden to meet with his lawyer or
family, though he was allowed to eat lunch with his wife, Liu Xia, and two
policemen on New Year's Day 2009. On 23 June 2009, the Beijing procuratorate
approved Liu's arrest on charges of "suspicion of inciting subversion of state
power," a crime under Article 105 of China's Criminal Law. In a Xinhua news
release announcing Liu's arrest, the Beijing Public Security Bureau alleged that
Liu had incited the subversion of state power and the overturn of the socialist
system through methods such as spreading rumors and slander, citing almost
verbatim Article 105; the Beijing PSB also noted that Liu had "fully confessed."

On 1 December 2009, Beijing police transferred Liu's case to the procuratorate
for investigation and processing; on 10 December, the procuratorate formally
indicted Liu on charges of "inciting subversion of state power" under and sent
his lawyers, Shang Baojun and Ding Xikui, the indictment document. He was tried
at Beijing No. 1 Intermediate Court on 23 December 2009. His wife was not
permitted to observe the hearing, although his brother-in-law was present.
Diplomats from more than a dozen states – including the U.S., Britain, Canada,
Sweden, Australia and New Zealand – were denied access to the court to watch the
trial and stood outside the court for its duration. Amongst these included
Gregory May, political officer at the U.S. Embassy, and Nicholas Weeks, first
secretary of the Swedish Embassy. 模板:Cquote

This statement, titled "I have no enemies", was later read in the 2010 Nobel
Peace Prize ceremony, which Liu was unable to attend due to imprisonment. On 25
December 2009, Liu was sentenced to eleven years' imprisonment and two years'
deprivation of political rights by the Beijing No. 2 Intermediate Court on
charges of "inciting subversion of state power." According to Liu's family and
counsel, he plans to appeal the judgment. In the verdict, Charter 08 was named
as part of the evidence supporting his conviction. John Pomfret of The
Washington Post said Christmas Day was chosen to dump the news because the
Chinese government believed Westerners were less likely to take notice on a
holiday. 模板:CquoteIn an article published in the South China Morning Post, Liu
argued that his verdict violated China's constitution, and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights of the United Nations. He argued that charges
against him of 'spreading rumours, slandering and in other ways inciting the
subversion of the government and overturning the socialist system' were
contrived, as he did not fabricate or create false information, nor did he
besmirch the good name and character of others by merely expressing a point of
view, a value judgment.

Liu's detention was condemned worldwide by organisations and other countries. On
11 December 2008, the U.S. Department of State called for Liu's release, which
was followed on 22 December 2008 by a similar request from a consortium of
scholars, writers, lawyers and human rights advocates. Additionally, on 21
January 2009, 300 international writers, including Salman Rushdie, Margaret
Atwood, Ha Jin and Jung Chang, called for Liu's release in a statement put out
through PEN. In March 2009, the One World Film Festival awarded Liu Xiaobo the
Homo Homini Award, organized by the People in Need foundation, for promoting
freedom of speech, democratic principles and human rights.

In December 2009, the European Union and United States issued formal appeals
calling for the unconditional release of Liu Xiaobo. China, responding to the
international calls prior to the verdict, stated that other nations should
"respect China's judicial sovereignty and to not do things that will interfere
in China's internal affairs."

Responding to the verdict, United Nations Human Rights Commissioner Navanethem
Pillay expressed concern at the deterioration of political rights in China.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel strongly criticized the verdict, stating
"despite the great progress in other areas in the expression of views, I regret
that the Chinese government still massively restricts press freedom." Canada and
Switzerland also condemned the verdict. The Republic of China President Ma
Ying-jeou called on Beijing to "tolerate dissent". On 6 January 2010, former
Czech president Václav Havel joined with other communist-era dissidents at the
Chinese Embassy in Prague to present a petition calling for Liu's release. On 22
January 2010, European Association for Chinese Studies sent an open letter to Hu
Jintao on behalf of over 800 scholars from 36 countries calling for Liu's
release.

On 18 January 2010, Liu was nominated for the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize by Václav
Havel, the 14th Dalai Lama, André Glucksmann, Vartan Gregorian, Mike Moore,
Karel Schwarzenberg, Desmond Tutu and Grigory Yavlinsky. China's Foreign
Ministry spokesperson Ma Zhaoxu stated that awarding the Nobel Peace Prize to
Liu would be "totally wrong". Geir Lundestad, a secretary of the Nobel
Committee, stated the award would not be influenced by Beijing's opposition. On
25 September 2010, The New York Times reported that a petition in support of the
Nobel nomination was being circulated in China.

On 14 September 2010, the Mayor of Reykjavík, Jón Gnarr, met on an unrelated
matter with CPC Politburo member Liu Qi and demanded China set the dissident Liu
Xiaobo free. Also that September Václav Havel, Dana Němcová and Václav Malý,
leaders of Czechoslovakia's Velvet Revolution, published an open letter in the
International Herald Tribune calling for the award to be given to Liu, while a
petition began to circulate soon afterwards.

On 6 October 2010, the non-governmental organization Freedom Now, which serves
as an international counsel to Liu Xiaobo as retained by his family, publicly
released a letter from 30 members of the U.S. Congress to President Barack
Obama, urging him to directly raise both Liu's case and that of fellow
imprisoned dissident Gao Zhisheng to Chinese President Hu Jintao at the G-20
Summit in November 2010. The Republic of China President Ma Ying-jiu
congratulated Liu on winning the Nobel Prize and requested Chinese authorities
to improve their impression to the world about human rights, but not calling for
his release from prison.

In 2011, the WorldWideReading is dedicated to Liu Xiaobo; on March 20, there
were readings in more than 60 towns and cities on all continents and broadcast
via radio stations. The appeal "Freedom for Liu Xiaobo" has so far been
supported by more than 700 writers from around the world, amongst them the Nobel
Prize laureates John M. Coetzee, Nadine Gordimer, Herta Müller and Elfriede
Jelinek, as well as Breyten Breytenbach, Eliot Weinberger, Salman Rushdie,
Vikram Seth, Mario Vargas Llosa, Wolf Biermann and Dave Eggers.

The international literature festival called for a worldwide reading on 20 March
2011 for Liu Xiaobo. More than 700 authors from all continents signed the appeal
and over 150 institutions took part in the event.

模板:Main On 8 October 2010, the Nobel Committee awarded Liu the Nobel Peace Prize
"for his long and non-violent struggle for fundamental human rights in China,"
saying that Liu had long been front-runner as the recipient of the prize.

China reacted negatively to the award, immediately censoring news about the
announcement of the award in China, though later that day became
available.模板:Clarify Foreign news broadcasters including CNN and the BBC were
immediately blocked, while heavy censorship was applied to personal
communications. The Chinese Foreign Ministry denounced the award to Liu Xiaobo,
saying that it "runs completely counter to the principle of the award and is
also a desecration of the Peace Prize." The Norwegian ambassador to the People's
Republic of China was summoned by the Foreign Ministry on 8 October 2010 and was
presented with an official complaint about the granting of the Nobel Peace Prize
to Liu. The Chinese government has called Liu Xiaobo a criminal and stated that
he does not deserve the prize. Chinese dissident Wei Jingsheng criticized Liu by
calling him "the accomplice of the Communist regime."

Following the announcement of the Nobel Peace Prize, celebrations in China were
either stopped or curtailed, and prominent intellectuals and other dissidents
were detained, harassed or put under surveillance; Liu's wife, Liu Xia, was
placed under house arrest, and was forbidden to talk to reporters even though no
official charges were brought. Sixty-five countries with missions in Norway were
all invited to the Nobel Prize ceremony, but fifteen declined, in some cases due
to heavy lobbying by China. Besides China, these countries were Russia,
Kazakhstan, Tunisia, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Iraq, Iran, Vietnam, Venezuela,
Egypt, Sudan, Cuba and Morocco.

China also imposed travel restrictions on known dissidents ahead of the
ceremony. A Chinese group announced that its answer to the Nobel Peace Prize,
the Confucius Peace Prize, would be awarded to former Taiwan Vice-President Lien
Chan for the bridge of peace he has been building between Taiwan and Mainland
China. Lien Chan himself denied any knowledge of the $15,000 prize.

模板:Commons category 模板:Wikisource Liu's verdict and articles cited as evidence
of Liu's guilt in the verdict

模板:S-start 模板:S-ach 模板:S-bef 模板:S-ttl 模板:S-aft 模板:S-end 模板:2010 Nobel Prize
winners 模板:Nobel Peace 模板:Footer Homo Homini Award laureates 模板:1989 Tiananmen
protests 模板:Use dmy dates 模板:Persondata



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leopold_Ru%C5%BEi%C4%8Dka

Leopold Ružička, Gwzlozdeihnga vaqhaggya. Youq 1939 nienz ndaej Nobel vaqhag
ciengj. Leopold Ružička gaenq ndaejdaengj bat aen honoris causa gohyoz bozswh
yozvei, caet aen ciengj, ngeih cib seiq aen mingzdaeuz veiyenz.

Ružička was born in Vukovar, Croatia, then part of Kingdom of Hungary,
Austro-Hungarian Empire. His family of craftsmen and farmers was mostly of
Croatian origin, with a Czech great grandparent, and a great grandmother and a
great grandfather from Austria.

Ružička attended the classics-program secondary school in Osijek. He changed his
original idea of becoming a priest and switched to studying technical
disciplines. Chemistry was his choice, probably because he hoped to get a
position at the newly opened sugar refinery built in Osijek.

Due to the excessive hardship of everyday and political life, he left and chose
the High Technical School in Karlsruhe in Germany. He was a good student in
areas he liked and that he thought would be necessary and beneficial in future,
which was organic chemistry. That is why his physical chemistry professor, Fritz
Haber (Nobel laureate in 1918), opposed his summa cum laude degree. However, in
the course of his studies, Ružička set up excellent cooperation with Hermann
Staudinger (a Nobel laureate in 1953). Studying within Staudinger's department,
he obtained his doctor's degree in 1910. With Staudinger, Ružička went to Zurich
and was his assistant.

Ružička's first works originated during that period in the field of chemistry of
natural compounds. He remained in this field of research all his life. He
investigated the ingredients of the Dalmatian insect powder (Pyrethrum
cinerariifolium), a highly esteemed insecticide. In this way, he came into
contact with the chemistry of terpene, a fragrant oil of vegetable origin,
interesting to the perfume industry. He intended to start individual research
and even started successful and productive cooperation with the Chuit & Naef
Company (later known as Firmenich) in Geneva.

In 1916–1917, he received the support of the oldest perfume manufacturer in the
world Haarman & Reimer, of Holzminden in Germany. With expertise in the terpene
field, he became senior lecturer in 1918, and in 1923, honorary professor at the
ETH (Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule) as well the University in Zurich.
Here, with a group of his doctoral students, he proved the structure and
existence of the compounds of muscone and civet, the scents derived from the
musk deer and the civet cat. The Ruzicka large ring synthesis is a method in
organic chemistry for the organic synthesis of these type of compounds.

In 1921, the Geneva perfume manufacturers Chuit & Naef asked him to collaborate.
Working here, Ružička achieved financial independence, but not as big as he did
plan so he left Zurich to start working for the Ciba, Basel- based company. In
1927, he took over the organic chemistry chair at Utrecht University in
Netherlands. In Netherlands he remained for three years, and then returned to
Switzerland, which was superior in its chemical industry.

Back to Zurich, at ETH he became professor of organic chemistry and started the
most brilliant period of his professional career. He widened the area of his
research, adding to it the chemistry of higher terpenes and steroids. After the
successful synthesis of sex hormones (androsterone and testosterone), his
laboratory became the world center of organic chemistry.

In 1939, he won the Nobel prize for chemistry with Adolf Butenandt. In 1940,
following the award, he was invited by the Croatian Chemical Association, where
he delivered a lecture to an over packed hall of dignitaries. The topic of the
lecture was From the Dalmatian Insect Powder to Sex Hormones. During the World
War II, some of his excellent collaborators were lost, but Ružička restructured
his laboratory with new, younger and promising people; among them was young
scientist Vladimir Prelog. With new people and ideas new research areas were
opened.

Following 1950, Ružička returned to chemistry, which had entered a new era of
research. Now he turned to the field of biochemistry, the problems of evolution
and genesis of life, particularly to the biogenesis of terpenes. He published
his hypothesis, Biogenetic Isoprene Rule, which was the peak of his scientific
career. Ružička retired in 1957, turning over the running of the laboratory to
his assistant and future Nobel laureate Vladimir Prelog.

Ružička dedicated significant efforts to the problems of education. He insisted
on a better organization of academic education and scientific work in the new
Yugoslavia, and established the Swiss-Yugoslav Society. Ružička became an
honorary academician at the then Yugoslav Academy of Sciences and Arts in
Zagreb. In Switzerland, the Ružička Award was established, for young chemists
working in Switzerland. In his native Vukovar, a museum was opened in his honour
in 1977.

Ružička married twice: to Anna Hausmann in 1912, and 1951 to Gertrud Acklin. He
died in Mammern, Switzerland, a village on Lake Constance.



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arthur_Schopenhauer

Arthur Schopenhauer, ciethaggya biengzdaek, de hag Kant faen ndaet yenyiengq
caueq vuzswdij. Caeuq gij vunz doengzseizdaih Schelling、Fichte、Hegel dengj
mboujdoengz, de genhciz vuzswdij, caemh nyinhnaeuz de maenz doenghgvaq yawjsoh
daeuj rox, dawz de dinghcinj guh eiqceiq. Eiqceiq coengz seizganh、hoengqganh dox
duzliz, sojmiz leixsingq、caizhag cungj gvi de guenj.

叔本华早年在英国和法国接受教育，能够流利使用英语、意大利语、西班牙语等多种欧洲语言和拉丁语等古代语言。他最初被迫选择经商以继承父业，在父亲死后他才得以进入大学。
1809年他进入哥廷根大学攻读医学，但把兴趣转移到了哲学，并在1811年于柏林学习一段时间。在那里他对费希特和施莱尔马赫产生了浓厚的兴趣。他以《论充足理由律的四
重根》获得了博士学位。歌德对此文非常赞赏，同时发现了叔本华的悲观主义倾向，告诫说：如果你爱自己的价值，那就给世界更多的价值吧。他將柏拉图奉若神明，康德視為奇蹟，
对这两人的思想相当崇敬。但厌恶后来费希特、黑格尔代表的思辨哲学。

1814年—1819年间，在理智的孤独中完成了他的代表作品《作为意志和表象的世界》，这部作品受到了印度哲学的影响，被认为是将东方和西方思想融合的首部作品，但发表
后无人问津。叔本华这么说他的这本书：「如果不是我配不上这个时代，那就是这个时代配不上我。」但凭这部作品他获得了柏林大学编外教授的资格，在这里的一件著名的事情是他
选择与自己认为是沽名钓誉的诡辩家的黑格尔同一时间授课。但黑格尔当时正处于他声名的顶峰，叔本华自然没能成功，很快他的班上就只剩下两三个人，最后一个也不剩了，只能凄
凉地离开柏林大学。

1833年在大学受挫之后，他移居法兰克福，并在那儿渡过了最后寂寞的27年。1837年，他首度指出康德《纯粹理性批判》一书第一版和第二版之间的重大差异。之后他出版
了多种著述，1841年出版了《论意志的自由》和《论道德的基础》两篇论文的合集，第一篇是挪威皇家科学院的有奖征文；第二篇是丹麦科学院的有奖徵文，于是他郑重的说明，
第一篇论文获科学院褒奖，第二篇未获科学院褒奖，在之后的书中他一再对丹麦科学院冷嘲热讽，在他成名后，丹麦科学院也成了一时间的笑柄。但这本书也几乎无人问津。1844
年，在他坚持下，《作为意志和表象的世界》出了第二版。第一版此时已早已绝版，且未能引起评论家和学术界丝毫兴趣，第二版的购者结果也寥寥无几。1851年，他完成了对《
作为意志和表象的世界》的补充与说明，结果就是这篇以格言体写成的《附录与补遗》使他获得了声誉，使他瞬间成了名人。有人写了《叔本华大辞典》和《叔本华全集》，有人评论
说他是具有世界意义的思想家。

1859年，《作为意志和表象的世界》的第三版引起轰动，叔本华称「全欧洲都知道这本书」，他在第三版序言中写道：「当这本书第一版问世时，我才30岁，看到第三版时却不
能早于72岁。总算我在彼德拉克的的名句中找到了安慰：『谁要是走了一整天，傍晚走到了，那也该满足了。』」叔本华在最后的十年终于得到了声望，但仍然过着獨居的生活。陪
伴他的是一条叫「世界灵魂」的卷毛狗，有人说这个名字是用来讽刺黑格尔，也有人说不是。1860年，叔本华因肺炎恶化去世，他在遗言中说：「希望爱好他哲学的人，能不偏不
倚地，独立自主地理解他的哲学。」

作为一个著名的悲观主义者，他的生活却并非完全隐遁，并且有些自私。但在某些方面他可称为性情中人：他谈过恋爱；也曾被称赞为一个诙谐且能侃侃而谈的人；他每天阅读伦敦的
《泰晤士报》；叔本華脾气火暴，曾把一个女裁缝推下楼梯（因为受不了她的吵闹并且多次劝阻都没有效果，他为此还特意写过一篇论噪音）并造成她残疾，因此叔本华需要按季度付
给她终生补偿。在此人过世时，叔本华写到：“老妇逝，重负释”（obit anus, abit
onus）。他的生活受人诟病，与他的哲学相悖更让人鄙薄。罗素在他编写的著名的《西方哲学史》中这么说：「假若我们根据叔本华的生活来判断，可知他的论调也是不真诚的」
。

充足理由律在叔本华那里具有一种先验的地位，即它是不能证明的。叔本华认为康德等人试图证明它是徒劳无功的，因为为了证明一个特定命题，就必须假定一个给它正确的理由，而
这个理由却正是充足理由律。为了证明它，就必须假定它成立，所以证明这个命题将陷入不可避免的循环论证。他的这种思想在一定程度上影响了维特根斯坦。此外叔本华将充足理由
律和矛盾律、同一律、排他律并列，把它看成第四个思维规律。

叔本华认为充足理由律的四种不同表现形式分别是：因果律，逻辑推论，数学证明，行为动机。这四种形式并不作为证明充足理由律的原因，而是充足理由律在这四者中表现其自身。

叔本华认为因果律只作用于表象之间而和物自体没有丝毫联系，而且一切表象间都受到因果律影响，任何事物的变化都有其先前的一个原因。像上帝这样一个不动的动者或者不存在的
东西进入存在被叔本华认为是绝对不可能的。基于这个立场，叔本华既是个坚定的无神论者又是一个完全的宿命论者。

逻辑真理的成立必然存在一个先验的、在它之前的真理，这是充足理由律的表现形式的第二个形式。叔本华将引导至真理的途径分为逻辑的，经验的，先验的，超验的。这四种理由和
根据证明真理本身的同时也表现了充足理由律。

因果律中的表象被认为是时间和空间中纯粹直观的表象，而时间和空间本身是在对表象观察中被感性地连续知觉到的表象，两者间的本质区别是物质。这里叔本华沿用了康德的看法，
时间和空间分别对应于数学和几何。时空中的表象是数学证明的前提而不是它可证明的依据。

人的行为动机被叔本华认为是充足理由律第四种形式。也就是说，人的每一个行为必有其动机上的原因，并从动机上得到解释。事实上这一看法引出了他的另一部著作《作为意志和表
象的世界》，也奠定了它的伦理学说。

叔本华认为康德的最大功绩不是他的认识论，而在于他划分了表象和物自体之间的区别。他认为康德错误地假定知觉包括想象，将直观和思维混淆起来。康德构造了将感性直观和知性
十二范畴共同构成经验对象的理论。叔本华發現若按照这种理论，表象世界就成了既是直观又是思维，既非直观又非思维的东西。而且这样一来动物要么就具有思维，要么就连外在世
界的表象也没有了，这显然是不合情理的。

叔本华建议读这本书的前提是《纯粹理性批判》、《论充足理由律的四重根》以及他对康德哲学的批判。更确切的说，这本书的主旨是作为表象但最终作为意志的世界，而不是将两者
并列的。在这本书中，叔本华试图解决康德哲学遗留下的难题。和费希特、谢林、黑格尔等人取消物自体的做法不同，叔本华保留了物自体，并将其定义为意志。所以这整部书都是为
了阐述这一思想的，他从写下这本书到去世为止坚信自己已经解决了世界之迷。

这本书分为四个部分，第一部分重新诠释了充足理由律，解释为什么现象世界必须通过充足理由律来了解；第二部分提供了意志显现的细节，它是一种既不满足又不停止，盲目的冲动
，要求人从自身存在本质即欲望之中解放出来；第三部分试图通过对自然和生命的审美，即艺术中获得一种短暂的慰籍；第四部分以伦理学和禁欲主义的形式提供一种可能获得拯救的
方式。

叔本华是个涉猎广泛的美学家，他对音乐、绘画、诗歌和歌剧等等都有研究。他把艺术看作是解除人类存在的痛苦一个可能途径。在《作为意志和表象的世界》第三部分，他对柏拉图
表示了敬意，在这里他讨论了艺术以及艺术的积极意义。他认为艺术是独立于充足理由律之外的表象，所以它能摆脱意志无处不在的诉求。而这种艺术的表象和柏拉图的理念论有相似
之处。

柏拉图的理念论是为了解释这样一个问题：我们遇到的各种事物中，有些事物与另一些如此相似，如果不是因为它们的个体性就几乎分辨不了。于是就有了共相和殊相的问题，在柏拉
图看来，只有理念是永恒的，而经验世界是处在不断变化中的。叔本华意识到柏拉图的理念论和康德的物自体有异曲同工之妙，康德认为知识只是在认识表象而不是自在之物，柏拉图
认为我们认识的经验世界不是真正的认识对象，只有理念才有意义。

叔本华认为艺术品具有一种超时间的本质，而音乐同时具备超时间和超空间的本质，所以音乐不只是对理念的复制，它还更接近意志其本身。所以它也就具有一种更高的价值。对叔本
华来说，音乐和表象世界几乎是并列的存在。但这种美都只能使人们从意志那里得到暂时的解脱，因为这种对于美的诉求只能使人陷入意志其本身的陷阱中去，所以它仍然具有一定的
局限性。

叔本华认为伦理学是很简单的一门学科，他从人类行为的动机出发探讨人类道德的基础。叔本华认为人类行为的动机可以分成三种：希望自己快乐，希望他人痛苦，希望别人快乐。他
将这三种动机分别概括为利己、恶毒、同情，其中利己和恶毒是非道德的推动力，只有基于同情是真正的道德行为。

叔本华认为很多表面上的道德行为都是出于利己的目的而做出的，其中最重要的两个原因是个人名誉和法律规范。出于个人名誉的道德行为其目的隐含着满足自己的意欲，希望自己获
得他人的敬意从而产生心理上的满足。而迫于法律规范的道德行为则是为了规避法律惩罚，免于自己受到损失而做出的。这些行为在叔本华看来是没有真正道德意义的。出于这种目的
的极端形式是：一切都是我的，别人什么都没有。基于这个原因的庸俗情况就是我们常看到的，那些为了生理需求上的诸如食欲、性欲以及舒适等等要求而发展出来的极端不道德行为
。

叔本华认为真正的道德是非常稀有的，真正道德的人也是万中无一，他说我们会对那些道德行为产生敬意正说明了那些道德行为与众不同，是不可思议的。他引用卢梭的话说，人们不
会对比自己幸福的人产生同感，而只会对比我们不幸的人感同身受。即我们的直接同感只局限于对他人的痛苦，而不是安逸。因此，同情实质上是对他人痛苦的感同身受，也就是将他
人与自己视为一体。从同情出发，直到高尚无私，慷慨大量，一切对于美德的赞美词汇都出于此而没有其它。

叔本华将从同情出发的伦理学基本原则定为：不伤害别人，尽量帮助每一个人，其对应的两大基本美德是公正和仁爱。公正表现了同情的否定性质，即不能忍受他人的痛苦，迫使自己
至少不去伤害他人。而仁爱则表现为同情心的肯定作用，它比公正更高一个级别，即看见他人痛苦，就象自己受苦，从而使自己去帮助每一个人。叔本华认为这两者都是极端罕见的，
但又是确实存在的，即便再没有道德的人也无法否认公正和仁爱这两者。

叔本华认为对于道德基础，也就是同情心的起源论证是最困难的问题。由于同情心的本质是对他人痛苦的感同身受，也就是认为人、我其实本无差异。在利己和痛苦主义者看来，他人
和自我之间存在一种绝对的差别，这是他们和富有同情心的人根本上的不同。所以道德的起源也就是看透他人和自我间的无差异性，这即是同情的基石，也是道德的基石。展开而去，
就是认识到万物间的无差异性，这里叔本华对道德起源的论证存有一种神秘主义倾向（万物一体），和中国的庄子的齐物思想本质上有共同之处。

叔本华的形而上学构建于两个基础概念之上：一是-{表象}-和意志虽然是同一的，并且共同构成世界，但意志是决定性的，任何表象都只是意志的客体化；二是意志永远表现为某
种无法满足又无所不在的欲求。于是世界本质就是某种无法满足的欲求，所以从逻辑上说，它永不可能被满足。所以如果不能满足的欲求是某种痛苦，那么世界就无法摆脱其痛苦的本
质。人们只是永远试图使自己的欲求满足，但这种满足却更加证明和显现了意志本身，这被叔本华认为是世界上最悲哀的事情。所以他认为无论一个人是乐天派还是悲观派，都不能摆
脱根本上的痛苦，乐天派只是对现实的躲避，是自我欺骗所造成的假象。所以对悲观主义的怀疑者们只能从叔本华的形而上学上进行争论而不是争论悲观主义本身。

叔本华的这种论调有时候使他被认为是虚无主义者，但事实上叔本华认为生命具有某种意义，虽然它是一种消极的意义。意志本身虽然无法逃避，但意志本身却体现了某种意义。在《
作为意志和表象的世界》一书第四部分中，叔本华提供了一种以禁欲主义的方式来找到希望的可能。他认为人只有在摆脱一种强烈的欲望冲动的时候才能获得其根本上的自由，只有打
破意志对于行为本身的控制，才能获得某种幸福的可能。但叔本华却又强调这种禁欲主义的行为方式其本身就是一种苦行。

叔本华是一个彻底的宿命论者和决定论者。表象间受到因果律的影响，而表象和意志间没有联系。意志通过某种超因果律的却又基于因果律的法则和表象世界发生关系。发生的一切事
情都按照其严格的必然性而发生，我们所感觉到的自由意志仍是处于表象世界的活动，而我们所观察到的任何-{表象}-以及人的任何行为都受到意志这样一种神秘的力量的控制。
这种观点可以被归纳为这样一句话：我们可以做我们想做的，但不能想我们所想的。

从本质上而言，叔本华的哲学在于否认人或世界的存在具有某种终极价值。叔本华认为基督教学说充满了荒唐、矛盾，以其编造的故事和教条束缚人的自由，这和叔本华的哲学思想具
有相抵之处，所以，叔本华是否认基督教的。然而，一个明显的事实是叔本华崇尚印度文化及其宗教，所以，说他是个纯然的反宗教者也是不恰当的。

叔本华是少数维特根斯坦阅读并欣赏的哲学家之一。影响了尼采、萨特等诸多哲学家，开启了非理性主义哲学，尼采十分欣赏他的作品，曾作《作为教育家的叔本华》来纪念他。瓦格
纳把歌剧《尼伯龙根的指环》献给叔本华。莫泊桑称他为“人类历史上最伟大的梦想破坏者”。国学大师王国维的思想亦深受叔本华的影响，在其著作《人间词话》中以叔本华的理论
评宋词；还曾借助其理论发展了红学，成就颇高。



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yienzbit

Yienzbit（Vahyinghgoz：Pencil），dwg cungj biz, yungh daeuj youq gwn ceij sij
saw、guh veh. De yungh rinmaeg guh bizsim, yungh faex guh bizganj.

1564年，英格兰岛受飓风袭击，昆布兰地区的许多大树被连根拔起，人们在树根下发现了一种黑色的矿物质——石墨。當石墨擦過物體時，可以在物体上留下黑色的石墨薄層；石
墨以范德华力附著在紙上。因当时化学刚开始发展，故石墨被误认为是「铅」。当地牧羊人常用它在羊身上画记号，以便于辨认。石墨这种特殊的矿物质非常纯净结实，可以很容易把
它制成棒形。石墨的价值不久之后就变得越来越大，主要是因为它可用于在加农炮模具上画线，并且这个矿已被皇室所控制。石墨被私运出去制作铅笔。因为石墨比较柔软，必须制成
一定形状。石墨棒起初是用细绳或羊皮纸包装。铅笔的好用性被广为传播，吸引了全世界著名艺术家的注意。首先是意大利人想到用木头来固定它，刚开始的时候是在木头中挖出棒形
的洞。不久以后，发明了一种更方便的技巧：用两块雕刻过的木头夹住石墨棒，然后将两块木头用胶水粘住——从本质上来说，这个方法与现在所使用的是一致的。

虽然在世界的其他地方也发现过石墨，但是纯度和质量却与英格兰岛发现的不一样，必须碾碎它以去除杂质，留下石墨粉。英格兰继续垄断铅笔的生产，直到出现一种新方法可以重新
组合石墨粉。这种直接从原始石墨中切取出来的方形英国铅笔一直生产到19世纪80年代。现在，在凯斯维克镇（靠近原来发现石墨块的地方）有一个铅笔博物馆。

在拿破仑战争的时候英国和德国铅笔不再供应给法国。拿破仑部队里的一个军官试图改变这种情况。1795年孔德发现可以把石墨粉用粘土混合，将其做成棒形放入窑中烘烤。通过
改变石墨对粘土混合的比率，可以改变石墨棒的硬度（粘土越多，铅笔就越硬，笔迹颜色越浅）。这个制作方法一直延用到今天。

先把細微的石墨粉、黏土（运用其可塑性和粘结性）和水混合而成的液體擠進一支細金屬管子，形成像麪條一樣的長條形。把長條晾干、切割，放在窰中烘烤，再放進熱油或蜡中（运
用石蜡的防水性和较光滑的性质）。接着把木塊（通常使用容易削磨的雪松木）鋸成像鉛筆一半厚度的板條，將板條刨平，刻上細長凹糟。再把長條狀的鉛放進凹槽中，之後在另一塊
板條上塗上膠水，然後壓在第一塊木條上。當膠水乾了之後，便可切割成獨立的鉛筆，製成不同的形狀，經過磨平、塗色，最後蓋上生産商的商標和其他資料，一支無縫的鉛筆便制成
了。有時候，生産商還會在鉛筆的一端裝上橡皮擦。



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ndoengrum

Ndoengrum baugvaq ndoengrum dienseng caeuq diegrum goengrengz, danq itbuen ceij
gaiqgonq.

Grassland vegetation can vary in height from very short, as in chalk where the
vegetation may be less than 模板:Convert high, to quite tall, as in the case of
North American tallgrass prairie, South American grasslands and African savanna.

Woody plants, shrubs or trees, may occur on some grasslands – forming savannas,
scrubby grassland or semi-wooded grassland, such as the African savannas or the
Iberian dehesa. Such grasslands are sometimes referred to as wood-pasture or
woodland.

As flowering plants, grasses grow in great concentrations in climates where
annual rainfall ranges between 模板:Convert. The root systems of perennial grasses
and forbs form complex mats that hold the soil in place.

The appearance of mountains in the western United States during the Miocene and
Pliocene epochs, a period of some 25 million years, created a continental
climate favorable to the evolution of grasslands. Existing forest biomes
declined, and grasslands became much more widespread. Following the Pleistocene
Ice Ages, grasslands expanded in range in the hotter, drier climates, and began
to become the dominant land feature worldwide.

Natural grasslands primarily occur in regions that receive between 模板:Convert of
rain per year, as compared with deserts, which receive less than 模板:Convert and
tropical rainforests, which receive more than 模板:Convert. Anthropogenic
grasslands often occur in much higher rainfall zones, as high as 模板:Convert
annual rainfall. Grassland can exist naturally in areas with higher rainfall
when other factors prevent the growth of forests, such as in serpentine barrens,
where minerals in the soil inhibit most plants from growing.

Average daily temperatures range between −20 and 30 °C. Temperate grasslands
have warm summers and cold winters with rain or some snow.

Grasslands dominated by unsown wild-plant communities ("unimproved grasslands")
can be called either natural or 'semi-natural' habitats. The majority of
grasslands in temperate climates are 'semi-natural'. Although their plant
communities are natural, their maintenance depends upon anthropogenic activities
such as low-intensity farming, which maintains these grasslands through grazing
and cutting regimes. These grasslands contain many species of wild plants –
grasses, sedges, rushes and herbs – 25 or more speerican prairie grasslands or
lowland wildflower meadows in the UK are now rare and their associated wild
flora equally threatened. Associated with the wild-plant diversity of the
"unimproved" grasslands is usually a rich invertebrate fauna; also there are
many species of birds that are grassland "specialists", such as the snipe and
the Great Bustard. Agriculturally improved grasslands, which dominate modern
intensive agricultural landscapes, are usually poor in wild plant species due to
the original diversity of plants having been destroyed by cultivation, the
original wild-plant communities having been replaced by sown monocultures of
cultivated varieties of grasses and clovers, such as Perennial ryegrass and
White Clover. In many parts of the world "unimproved" grasslands are one of the
least threatened habitats, and a target for acquisition by wildlife conservation
groups or for special grants to landowners who are encouraged to manage them
appropriately.

Grasslands are of vital importance for raising livestock for human consumption
and for milk and other dairy products.

Grassland vegetation remains dominant in a particular area usually due to
grazing, cutting, or natural or manmade fires, all discouraging colonisation by
and survival of tree and shrub seedlings. Some of the world's largest expanses
of grassland are found in African savanna, and these are maintained by wild
herbivores as well as by nomadic pastoralists and their cattle, sheep or goats.

Grasslands may occur naturally or as the result of human activity. Grasslands
created and maintained by human activity are called anthropogenic grasslands.
Hunting peoples around the world often set regular fires to maintain and extend
grasslands, and prevent fire-intolerant trees and shrubs from taking hold. The
tallgrass prairies in the US Midwest may have been extended eastward into
Illinois, Indiana, and Ohio by human agency. Much grassland in northwest Europe
developed after the Neolithic Period, when people gradually cleared the forest
to create areas for raising their livestock.

These grasslands are classified with tropical and subtropical savannas and
shrublands as the tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands
biome. Notable tropical and subtropical grasslands include the Llanos grasslands
of northern South America.

Mid-latitude grasslands, including the Prairie and Pacific Grasslands of North
America, the Pampas of Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay, calcareous downland, and
the steppes of Europe. They are classified with temperate savannas and
shrublands as the temperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublands biome.
Temperate grasslands are the home to many large herbivores, such as bison,
gazelles, zebras, rhinoceroses, and wild horses. Carnivores like lions, wolves
and cheetahs and leopards are also found in temperate grasslands. Other animals
of this region include: deer, prairie dogs, mice, jack rabbits, skunks, coyotes,
snakes, fox, owls, badgers, blackbirds (both Old and New World varieties),
grasshoppers, meadowlarks, sparrows, quails, hawks and hyenas.

Grasslands that are flooded seasonally or year-round, like the Everglades of
Florida, the Pantanal of Brazil, Bolivia and Paraguay or the Esteros del Ibera
in Argentina.They are classified with flooded savannas as the flooded grasslands
and savannas biome and occur mostly in the tropics and subtropics.

High-altitude grasslands located on high mountain ranges around the world, like
the Páramo of the Andes Mountains. They are part of the montane grasslands and
shrublands biome and also constitute tundra.

Similar to montane grasslands, polar arctic tundra can have grasses, but high
soil moisture means that few tundras are grass-dominated today. However, during
the Pleistocene ice ages, a polar grassland known as steppe-tundra occupied
large areas of the Northern hemisphere. These are in the tundra biome.

Also called desert grasslands, this is composed of sparse grassland ecoregions
located in the deserts and xeric shrublands biome.

Mites, insect larvae, nematodes and earthworms inhabit deep soil, which can
reach 模板:Convert underground in undisturbed grasslands on the richest soils of
the world. These invertebrates, along with symbiotic fungi, extend the root
systems, break apart hard soil, enrich it with urea and other natural
fertilizers, trap minerals and water and promote growth. Some types of fungi
make the plants more resistant to insect and microbial attacks.

Grassland in all its form supports a vast variety of mammals, reptiles, birds,
and insects. Typical large mammals include the Blue Wildebeest, American Bison,
Giant Anteater and Przewalski's Horse.

While grasslands in general support diverse wildlife, given the lack of hiding
places for predators, the African savanna regions support a much greater
diversity in wildlife than do temperate grasslands.

There is evidence for grassland being much the product of animal behaviour and
movement; some examples include migratory herds of antelope trampling vegetation
and African Bush Elephants eating Acacia saplings before the plant has a chance
to grow into a mature tree.



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vladimir_Nabokov

Vladimir Nabokov（Sawiekguek：Владимир Владимирович Набоков，Sawyinghguek：Vladimir
Vladimirovich Nabokov，1899 nienz 4 nyied 23 hauh - 1977nienz 7 nyied 2 hauh）,
Meijguek cozgya、vwnzdijgya、bihbingzgya、canghhoiz、seiyinz、gyausou caeuq
mbajhaggya. 1899 nienz seng youq ieklozswh Swn beijdaekbauj. De dauz liz guekcoj
gij seiz, yungh sawiekguek sij le haujlai sawcuenh. De dih daibyaujcoz dwg
《Lolita》. De caemh yenzgiu hagduznengz caeuq geizciengh lajbiengz.

Bonj saw Nabokov youq 1955 nienz sij 《Lolita》, gwn haenh lailai.
作者之後发表的英文小说《普寧》、《微暗的火》、《阿達》，这些作品展现了納波科夫对于咬文嚼字以及细节描写的钟爱。納博科夫的聲譽在晚年達到頂峰，被譽為“當代小說之王
”。

弗拉基米爾·納博科夫是弗拉基米爾·德米特里耶維奇·納博科夫和他的妻子艾伦娜所生的，是家中的长子。弗拉基米爾·納博科夫出生在当时地位显赫并且富有的家庭。他的孩童时
代在圣彼得堡度过。弗拉基米爾·納波科夫的家庭使用着三种语言俄语、英语、法语，所以納博科夫在孩童时代就能通晓三种语言。

1917年俄国二月革命爆发，弗拉基米爾·納博科夫一家离开苏联，前往克里米亚，他们在那里住了18个月。在克里米亚的白军起义失败之后，納波科夫一家离开苏联前往欧洲西
部开始背井离乡的生活。在1919年从俄国移民之后，納博科夫一家在英国定居，納博科夫成为剑桥大学三一学院的一名学生，有计划地学习斯拉夫语和罗曼语。

在1922年，納博科夫的父亲在德国柏林被俄罗斯君主制主义份子刺杀，原因是他尽力掩护了他们真正的目标——Pavel
Milyukov，一位拥护宪法的在野党领袖。这一关于错误认知而导致误杀的情节，反反复复出现于作者的小说中，尤其是当角色因为误解而被暴力杀害时。例如，在《微暗的火
》中，约翰·席德被错认为是Zembla之王而被刺杀。6月，纳博科夫接受剑桥法文与俄文学位，并迁往柏林与家人同住，以私人教授英语、法语、网球、拳击等维生。

納博科夫在昆蟲學上的成就同樣令人矚目。他將很多業餘時間都花在蝴蝶上，納博科夫自己不会開車，每次外出捕捉蝴蝶時，都是由妻子Véra載他。為追逐一隻蝴蝶，他們可以跋
涉十幾英里。他對捕獲的蝴蝶進行分類，並仔細地用顯微鏡觀察。在1940年代，他還出任了哈佛大學比較動物學博物館鱗翅目部的負責人，負責組織標本收集。不過由於納博科夫
是自學成才的學者，當他在世時，不少專業的鱗翅目學家都對其研究成果不以為然。

納博科夫主攻的是灰蝶中的一支，他認為這種灰蝶是在數百萬年前從西伯利亞經白令海峽遷徙至美洲大陸的，即由阿拉斯加飛越千山萬水到達智利。他於1945年公佈了這一結論，
稱這種灰蝶有過五次大遷徙，並將其在美洲大陸的分佈區域形容為一隻“大馬蹄”，但遭到了學界的尖銳批評。2011年1月英國皇家學會宣布，學者們經過為期十年的基因研究，
證實納博科夫的研究成果具有充足的科學依據，並認為他對灰蝶分類系統的完善做出了“重大貢獻”。



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hoengqceiqlwnh

Hoengqceiqlwnh (Cybernetics) dwg cungj gva yozgoh yenzgiu, gvendaengz gij
heifdoengj gamguenj. De caeuq leixlwnh sinsik、leixlwnh hoengqceiq、leixlwnh
heahdoengj gvenheah gaenjmaed. Hoengqceiqlwnh doiq heiqdoengj faedleix caeuq
heiqdoengj biengz cungj habyungh.

Cybernetics is only applicable when the system being analysed is involved in a
closed signal loop; that is, where action by the system causes some change in
its environment and that change is fed to the system via information (feedback)
that enables the system to change its behavior. This "circular causal"
relationship is necessary and sufficient for a cybernetic
perspective.模板:Citation needed System Dynamics, a related field, originated with
applications of electrical engineering control theory to other kinds of
simulation models (especially business systems) by Jay Forrester at MIT in the
1950s.

Contemporary cybernetics began as an interdisciplinary study connecting the
fields of control systems, electrical network theory, mechanical engineering,
logic modeling, evolutionary biology, neuroscience, anthropology, and psychology
in the 1940s, often attributed to the Macy Conferences.

Other fields of study which have influenced or been influenced by cybernetics
include game theory, system theory (a mathematical counterpart to cybernetics),
perceptual control theory, sociology, psychology (especially neuropsychology,
behavioral psychology, cognitive psychology), philosophy, and architecture and
organizational theory.



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cungzcoj

Cungzcoj Si (Sawgun: 崇左市) dieg youq baih doengnamz Guengjsae, dwg aen cungsim
cwngci ginghci gyauhdungh Gveiqsaenamz. Cungzcoj lisij gyaeraez, bya dah
gyaeundei, vunz gvai dieg ndei, lumj aen caw ndongqmigmig he seb youq bangx dah
Cojgyangh Namzguek neix. 2003 nienz 8 nyied 6 hauh, Cungzcoj Si Yinzminz Cwngfuj
venj baiz laebbaenz. Daengx si guenj Gyanghcouhgih caeuq Fuzsuih, Ningzmingz,
Lungzcouh, Dasinh, Denhdwngj daengj 5 aen yienh, daih guenj Bingzsiengz Si.
Gungh miz 38 cin 41 yangh, 806 aen hingzcwngcunh. Mienhcik gungh
17,345 bingzfuenggoengleix, ciemq Guengjsae cungj mienhcik 7.33%; yinzgouj gungh
227.36 fanh, comz youq Bouxcuengh, Bouxgun, Yauzcuz, Myauzcuz, Veizcuz, Dungcuz,
Suijcuz, Ginghcuz daengj minzcuz, ndawde yinzgouj Bouxcuengh miz 202.65 fanh,
ciemq cungj yinzgouj 89.13%, dwg Cungguek Bouxcuengh yinzgouj ciemq beijlaeh
ceiq sang aen digizsi he.

Cungzcoj Si dieg youq bien'gyaiq digih, saujsu minzcuz digih caeuq gwzming
laujgih, yiengjsouh guekgya baihsae daih haifat cwngcwz youhvei benhmau cwngzcwz
nem fuz hwnj saujsu minzcuz digih, gwzming laujgih cwngzcwz, vih daengx si
fazcanj bien'gyaiq mauyiz, mbehai doiq baihrog mauyiz caeuq gya vaiq ginghci
gensez yamqdin, daez hawj cwngzcwz baujhoh gengndongj. Miz sim angq coux
baengzyoux guek rog, Gangj Au beixnuengx, rog guek gyauzbauh caeuq ndaw guek gak
giz doengh boux daeuj neix douzswh haifat, caez guh ok saehnieb hungmbwk.



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yinzvwnz_yozgoh

Yinzvwnz yozgoh(Sawgun:人文学科) dwg aeu cazyawj、faencek caeuq bihban daeuj damqcaz
gij cingzgamj、daudaek caeuq leixciz vunzlajmbwn dih gak monz yozgoh caeuq
caizhag.

人文一词的中文，最早出现在《易经》中贲卦的彖辞：“刚柔交错，天文也。文明以止，人文也。观乎天文以察时变；观乎人文以化成天下。”关于这个词的注解有很多，宋代程颐《
伊川易传》对此的解释是：“天文，天之理也；人文，人之道也。天文，谓日月星辰之错列，寒暑阴阳之代变，观其运行，以察四时之速改也。人文，人理之伦序，观人文以教化天下
，天下成其礼俗，乃圣人用贲之道也。”（见《伊川易传》卷二）一般认为，中国传统的人文概念是指人的各种属性。

到了近代，人文这个词被用来翻译“Humanism”，也就是人文主义，这个词是欧洲文艺复兴时期一些知识分子，在超越和反对中世纪欧洲宗教传统的过程中，以古希腊、罗马
文化为学习典范，以此回归世俗。这些人就被称为“人文学者”，到19世纪的欧洲又有所谓的人文学科，20世纪英美的大学里面也开始出现人文学科。人文学科的意思不是说人文
的东西用一种科学的理论来解释，而是说对于人的各方面的一种求知、对于人的知识的一种探讨。



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seiqhauh_damjhaek

Seiqhauh damjhaek（Vah Daekguek：Panzerkampfwagen IV）dwg guenj damjhaek cunghyingz
ndeu, Nabceiq daekguek youq gij seiz cancwng lajbiengz baez daih'ngeih soj caux.
Gyoengqde baenjgyaeuh yungh daeuj coengq bouhbing.

Zur Endausstattung der zukünftigen Panzertruppe hatte schon im Jahre 1930 eine
Arbeitsgruppe um den späteren Generaloberst Heinz Guderian zwei Grundtypen von
Panzerkampfwagen vorgesehen, wobei die endgültige Ausstattung der
Panzerdivisionen das Heereswaffenamt im Januar 1934 festlegte. Drei der vier
Kompanien einer Panzerabteilung sollten einen Wagen mit panzerbrechender Kanone
erhalten, den späteren Panzerkampfwagen III. Die vierte Kompanie sollte mit
einem Unterstützungsfahrzeug ausgerüstet werden, das mit seiner großkalibrigen
Waffe Ziele bekämpfen sollte, wofür die kleinere panzerbrechende Waffe des
Panzers III ungeeignet war. Aus dieser Überlegung heraus entstand der
Panzerkampfwagen IV.

Abgesehen von der Hauptwaffe glich das Anforderungsprofil dem des Panzers III;
die Besatzung sollte aus fünf Mann bestehen, eine Funkanlage sollte die
Kommunikation ermöglichen und das Gesamtgewicht sollte mit 24 Tonnen die
standardmäßige Brückenlast berücksichtigen.

miniatur|MAN-Prototyp mit Schachtellaufwerk Wegen des noch als Reichsgesetz
geltenden Versailler Vertrages erhielt das Fahrzeug aus Gründen der
Geheimhaltung die Tarnbezeichnung „Mittlerer Traktor“. Dieser Deckname wurde
kurz darauf in „Bataillonsführerwagen“ (BW) geändert, bis 1935 mit der Gründung
der Wehrmacht sämtliche Tarnnamen entfielen. An den noch Ende 1934 beginnenden
Entwicklungsarbeiten beteiligten sich Rheinmetall, MAN und Krupp. Neu war das
Konzept eines Unterstützungspanzers mit nur einem Turm, denn zur damaligen Zeit
bestand bei den Armeen der größeren Staaten die Ansicht, dass für solche
Aufgaben Multiturmpanzer besser geeignet wären.

Der Rheinmetall-Prototyp hatte ein Gewicht von 18 Tonnen und erreichte mit einem
320-PS-Motor eine Höchstgeschwindigkeit von 30 km/h. Das Laufwerk bestand aus
insgesamt acht an langen Hebelarmen doppelt aufgehängten Laufrollen und glich
dem des von derselben Firma hergestellten Neubaufahrzeugs. Im Gegensatz dazu
besaß der Prototyp von MAN ein Schachtellaufwerk, das von Erich Kniepkamp
beeinflusst war, der als Abteilungsleiter im Heereswaffenamt später als
Hauptverantwortlicher für die Einführung des Schachtellaufwerkes bei den
deutschen Panzerkampfwagen galt. Der Krupp-Vorschlag sah auf Veranlassung des
HWA ebenfalls ein solches Laufwerk mit Drehstabfederung vor. Obwohl dieses
Laufwerk weniger beschussempfindlich war und bessere Laufeigenschaften besaß,
beharrten die Krupp-Ingenieure auf ihrer Blattfederung und nahmen von der
Drehstabfederung trotz Widerstand des HWA wieder Abstand. Nachdem 1935/36 alle
Prototypen umfangreiche Tests durchlaufen hatten, wurde Krupp als endgültige
Produktionsfirma bestimmt. Der Panzer IV war der letzte noch in Friedenszeiten
entwickelte deutsche Panzerkampfwagen.

Im Oktober 1937 lief die Produktion des Panzers mit der „Ausführung A“ bei den
Krupp-Gruson-Werken in Magdeburg-Buckau an. Im Gegensatz zur Produktion der
vorangegangenen Panzerkampfwagen I bis III, wo mehrere Hersteller herangezogen
wurden, war das Magdeburger Werk bis Ende 1941 die einzige Produktionsstätte für
den Panzer IV. Aufgrund der Funktion als Unterstützungsfahrzeug war seine
Beschaffung in deutlich geringerer Anzahl als die des Panzers III vorgesehen,
was sich an den anfangs niedrigen Stückzahlen bemerkbar machte.

miniatur|Panzer IV Ausf. A bei einer Vorführung im Gelände, 1938 Nachdem schon
im Jahr 1938 die Ausstattung der bis dahin bestehenden Panzerregimenter mit dem
Panzer IV weitgehend abgeschlossen war, verblieb die Produktion auch nach dem
Kriegsbeginn auf niedrigem Niveau. Infolge der geringen Leistungsfähigkeit der
Industrie sowie der Einlagerung in Depots durch das OKH gelangten anfänglich nur
wenige Fahrzeuge an die kämpfende Truppe. Die Produktion des Panzers IV besaß
noch keine besondere Prioritätsstufe, was sich auch auf das Unternehmen Krupp
als Hersteller auswirkte. So arbeiteten im Krupp-Gruson-Werk Anfang 1940 etwa
1200 Arbeiter, wobei die Fertigung des Panzers IV lediglich 35 % der
Auftragskapazität einnahm. Erst nachdem die Leistungsreserven des bis dahin
wichtiger erachteten Panzers III vollkommen erschöpft waren, lief ab 1942 die
Großserienproduktion des Panzers IV an. Als weitere Produktionsstätten kamen
jetzt die VOMAG im sächsischen Plauen und das größte Panzermontagewerk des
Deutschen Reiches, das Nibelungenwerk im niederösterreichischem Sankt Valentin,
hinzu. Als bedeutende Zulieferbetriebe von Panzerstahlplatten, Wannen und Türmen
fungierten das Stammwerk von Krupp in Essen, die Eisen- und Hüttenwerke in
Bochum, die Eisenwerke Oberdonau in Linz, der Dortmund-Hörder Hüttenverein in
Dortmund und Böhler & Co. in Kapfenberg. Die Maybach-Motoren kamen hauptsächlich
aus dem Maybach-Stammwerk und dem Tochterunternehmen Nordbau sowie als Lizenzbau
von Orenstein & Koppel in Nordhausen und von MAN; die Getriebe kamen von ZF in
Friedrichshafen. [[Datei:Bundesarchiv Bild 101I-124-0211-18, Im Westen, Panzer
IV.jpg|miniatur|Die frühen Ausführungen des Panzers IV (hier Ausf. D) waren in
ihrer Gestaltung dem Panzer III sehr ähnlich]] Im Falle eines nur selten
erreichten betriebswirtschaftlichen Idealzustandes dauerte die Endmontage eines
Panzers IV rund 2000 Stunden. Die gesamte Fertigungszeit einschließlich aller
Teile der Unterlieferanten wurde auf rund 15.000 Stunden geschätzt. Der Preis
eines Panzerkampfwagens IV betrug ohne Hauptwaffe knapp über 100.000 Reichsmark.
Der Rohstoffbedarf belief sich – ohne Waffen, Optik und Funk – auf folgende
Mengen:

Wie alle deutschen Panzer wurde der Panzer IV vor allem zu Beginn der Produktion
in qualitativ hochwertiger Arbeit fabriziert, was naturgemäß einer rationellen
Massenfertigung entgegenstand. So war der Anteil der spanenden Bearbeitung bei
den Panzerplatten sehr hoch. Erst 1943 konnte bei Krupp die personalintensive
Bearbeitung mit der Einführung des autogenen Brennschneidens enorm verringert
werden. Schon im Jahr zuvor konnte die oft über 100 Stunden dauernde
Oberflächenhärtung des Panzerstahls durch Zementation durch die weit effektivere
Behandlung mit einer Gas-Sauerstoff-Flammhärtung ersetzt werden. Erfolgreiche
Versuche mit einer neuartigen Induktionshärtung konnten auf die
Panzerblechbearbeitung während des Krieges nicht mehr übertragen werden. Obwohl
im Verlauf der Produktion aufgrund von Materialmangel der Anteil von Mangan,
Chrom und Molybdän im Panzerstahl und damit auch dessen Qualität sank, konnte
durch die spezielle Oberflächenbehandlung eine gute Beschussfestigkeit erreicht
werden. Eine Brinell-Härteprüfung von britischer Seite ergab bei der
Frontpanzerung einer „Ausführung G“ den hohen Wert von bis zu 520 Brinell, was
den höchsten Härtegrad aller deutschen Panzer darstellte.

Anfang 1943 schlug der Generalstab des Heeres vor, die Herstellung aller
Panzerkampfwagen mit Ausnahme des Tigers und des Panthers einzustellen.
Generaloberst Guderian konnte jedoch den Weiterbau des Panzers IV durchsetzen.
Wenn zu diesem Zeitpunkt die Produktion des Panzers eingestellt worden wäre,
hätte das hart bedrängte Heer bis zur Serienreife des Panthers lediglich 25
Tiger-Panzer pro Monat als Nachschub erhalten. Einen weiteren Einblick in die
teils keiner klaren Leitlinie folgende Panzerproduktion gab der angeordnete
Programmwechsel in der Panzer-IV-Fertigung bei Krupp-Gruson im Jahre 1943. So
erhielt Krupp im April den Befehl, die Herstellung des Panzers IV aufzugeben und
auf die Panther-Produktion umzustellen. Im August erging die Anordnung, die
Herstellung des Panthers sofort zu stoppen und auf die Fertigung des Panzers IV
umzustellen. Aufgrund dieser Programmänderungen entstand ein Gesamtausfall von
300.000 Arbeitsstunden, was der Herstellung von 150 Panzern IV entsprach. Ende
des Jahres erfolgte dann die endgültige Einstellung der Panzer-IV-Produktion und
die Umstellung auf die Fertigung des Sturmgeschützes IV. Bis dahin stellte
Krupp-Gruson 2362 Panzer IV her; VOMAG bis zum Ende der Produktion im Frühsommer
1944 insgesamt 1374 Stück. Mit 4785 Exemplaren stellte das bis zum Kriegsende
produzierende Nibelungenwerk die meisten Fahrzeuge her.

Im Mai 1941 ordnete Hitler bei einer Besprechung auf dem Berghof an, beim
Panzer IV die Durchschlagskraft der Waffe zu erhöhen. Aus diesem Grund sollte
der Einbau der 5-cm-PaK 38 bis zum Ende des Jahres vorbereitet werden. Ein
Fahrzeug der Ausführung D wurde mit der langen 5-cm-Kwk L/60 ausgerüstet. Als
sich schon zu Beginn des Russlandfeldzuges zeigte, dass die 5-cm-Kanone gegen
die neuen sowjetischen Panzermodelle nicht wirksam genug war, wurde dieser Plan
gegenstandslos.

Ende 1944 beschäftigte sich Krupp mit der Möglichkeit einer Umbewaffnung des
Panzers IV. So kam es zu Überlegungen, den neuentwickelten Schmalturm des
Panther II auf das Fahrgestell des Panzers IV zu setzen. Zumindest wurde ein
Holzmodell der überlangen 7,5-cm-KwK L/70 in einen Panzer-IV-Turm eingebaut. Es
zeigte sich jedoch, dass eine Überlastung des Fahrgestelles den Einbau dieser
Waffe ausschloss. Weiterhin kam es zu Überlegungen, zwei rückstoßfreie
7,5-cm-Kanonen mit einem mittig gelegenen Einschießgewehr in einem hinten
offenen Drehturm zu installieren. Ein Holzmodell dieses Panzers wurde Anfang
1945 gebaut, bevor auch dieses Projekt zu den Akten gelegt wurde.

Schon 1937 vergab das Heereswaffenamt Aufträge an Henschel, MAN, Porsche und
Daimler-Benz, unter dem Projekt VK 3001 einen Nachfolger für den
Panzerkampfwagen IV in der 30-t-Klasse zu erschaffen. Während die gebauten
Prototypen von Henschel und Porsche gewisse Ähnlichkeiten mit dem Tiger hatten
und später auch die Voraussetzungen zu dessen Bau lieferten, leiteten die
Entwürfe von MAN und Daimler-Benz später zum Panther über. Wie auch der VK 2001
beim Panzer III wurden die noch konventionellen Entwürfe mit dem ersten
Auftauchen des T-34 hinfällig.

Gedacht als Unterstützungspanzer, sollte der Panzer IV dem Panzer III im Gefecht
Rückhalt geben und Ziele bekämpfen, die für dessen kleinkalibrige
panzerbrechende Waffe ungeeignet waren. Die Hauptmunition des Panzers IV sollten
Sprenggranaten sein, mit denen aus großer Distanz von bis zu 6 km feindliche
Panzerabwehrwaffen und Infanterie bekämpft werden sollten. Deswegen wurde
anfangs die schwache Panzerung und die kurze Stummelkanone als ausreichend
erachtet.

Der Panzer IV war für die Ausstattung der vierten Kompanie, der
Unterstützungskompanie, einer Panzerabteilung vorgesehen. Während der
Mobilmachung kurz vor Kriegsausbruch wurde diese Kompanie zu einer Ersatzeinheit
umfunktioniert, so dass die Gliederung jetzt aus zwei leichten und einer
mittleren bestand, wobei letztere aus Panzern III und Panzern IV bestehen
sollte. Nach der Umstrukturierung der Panzerdivisionen infolge deren
zahlenmäßiger Erhöhung 1940/41 bestand die mittlere Kompanie sollmäßig aus drei
Zügen mit insgesamt 14 Panzern IV und einem leichten Zug mit fünf Panzern II.
Eine völlig einheitliche Gliederung und Ausstattung aller Divisionen gelang
aufgrund des Kriegsverlaufes aber nicht. Bis zum Erscheinen des Tigers im Herbst
1942 und des Panthers im Sommer 1943 war der Panzer IV der schwerste deutsche
Panzerkampfwagen.

[[Datei:Bundesarchiv Bild 183-E10600, Graudenz, jubelnde Menschen neben Panzer
IV.jpg|miniatur|Die weißen Erkennungskreuze wurden nach dem Polenfeldzug
entfernt, nachdem diese vom Gegner als willkommene Zielhilfe genutzt wurden]]
Von den bis zum Beginn des Zweiten Weltkrieges produzierten 211 Panzerkampfwagen
IV nahmen 198 Stück am Polenfeldzug teil. Die restlichen Fahrzeuge befanden sich
bei den Panzerschulen, beim Ersatzheer oder standen im Heereszeugamt kurz vor
ihrer Übergabe. Daher spielte der Panzer IV während dieses Feldzuges so gut wie
keine Rolle. Aufgrund der qualitativen und quantitativen Überlegenheit der
deutschen Panzer kam es zu keinen hohen Verlusten – 19 Panzer IV mussten dort
als Totalverlust abgeschrieben werden.

Die Grenzen des Panzer IV wurden erstmalig im Westfeldzug aufgezeigt. Mit 278
Exemplaren spielte auch hier der Panzerkampfwagen IV bei rund 2500 Panzern nur
eine untergeordnete Rolle; neben den tschechischen Beutepanzern P 35(t) und
P 38(t) waren die mit Abstand wichtigsten Panzer die leichten Panzer I und
Panzer II. Jedoch hatte mit 97 komplett zerstörten Fahrzeugen der Panzer IV mit
35 % die höchste Verlustrate aller deutschen Panzer. Es zeigte sich, dass
aufgrund der tiefen Vorstöße der Verbände der Panzer IV oft die Funktion eines
Kampfpanzers übernehmen musste, für die er eigentlich nicht konzipiert war.
Jetzt wirkte sich die geringe Panzerung negativ aus, denn die moderne
französische 47-mm-PaK konnte noch aus 1500 m die Frontpanzerung des Panzers IV
durchschlagen. Demgegenüber konnte die Panzergranate aus der kurzen Kanone des
Panzers IV auf 500 m nur 38 mm Stahl durchschlagen, während die französischen
Standard-Panzer R 35, H 39 und S 35 über 40 mm und der Char B1 bis 60 mm stark
gepanzert waren, so dass die Besatzungen gezwungen waren, in teils
verlustreichen Manövern die Feindpanzer auszukurven und sie von der Seite oder
von hinten außer Gefecht zu setzen. Nicht die Qualität der deutschen Panzer,
sondern das neuartige Blitzkriegskonzept und die überlegene Führung der
vollständig mit Funkgeräten ausgerüsteten Einheiten entschieden diesen Feldzug.
Aufgrund des schnellen Sieges umgab den Panzer IV eine Aura, die konträr zu
seiner tatsächlichen Leistungsfähigkeit war.

Auch im Afrikafeldzug kam der Panzerkampfwagen IV zum Einsatz. Den meisten
britischen Panzern war er gleichwertig oder überlegen. Keine Chance hatte er
jedoch gegen die bis zu 80 mm starke Panzerung des schwerfälligen Matilda. Erst
die Ausführungen mit der langen Kanone und verstärkter Panzerung waren wiederum
allen britischen Panzern qualitativ überlegen, auch wenn aufgrund der
Nachschubprobleme nur wenige F2-Modelle zum Einsatz kamen. Da aufgrund
mangelnder Deckung in der Wüste die Gefechte auf große Entfernungen geführt
werden mussten, kam hier der Vorteil der langen 7,5-cm-Kanone besonders zum
Tragen. Die Briten konnten später mit der Einführung der Sechs-Pfünder-PaK und
der von den USA in großer Zahl gelieferten M3 Grant die Situation ausgleichen,
bevor sie aufgrund totaler zahlenmäßiger Überlegenheit den Feldzug für sich
entschieden.

miniatur|Im Russlandfeldzug war der Panzer IV mit der kurzen Kanone dem T-34
anfangs völlig unterlegen Im Juni 1941 belief sich der Gesamtbestand des
gesamten Heeres auf 572 Panzerkampfwagen IV, von denen sich 41 Stück noch in der
Instandsetzung befanden. An dem am 22. Juni beginnenden Russlandfeldzug nahmen
439 Panzer IV teil. Er war der Masse der meist aus leichten Modellen bestehenden
sowjetischen Panzerverbände überlegen. Dies änderte sich grundlegend, als die
neuen kampfstarken – aber noch relativ seltenen und taktisch ungünstig
eingesetzten – Modelle T-34 und KW-1 auf dem Schlachtfeld erschienen und den
Panzer IV deklassierten. Dessen kurze Waffe war absolut unterlegen und erzielte
selbst auf kurze Distanz kaum Wirkung, während der T-34 bereits aus 1000 m
Entfernung die Front des Panzers IV durchschlagen konnte. Deshalb blieb den
Besatzungen nur übrig, entweder von vorne auf das Laufwerk zu zielen, um den
Panzer bewegungsunfähig zu machen oder den Feindpanzer im gefährlichen Nahkampf
mit Treffern an den Seiten oder am Heck außer Gefecht zu setzen. Erst mit der
Einführung einer verbesserten Hohlladungsgranate, die im Sommer 1940 mit einer
Durchschlagsleistung von erst 40 mm, dann 70 mm und schließlich 100 mm
entwickelt wurde, konnten diese Panzer wirkungsvoll bekämpft werden, auch wenn
aufgrund der geringen Anfangsgeschwindigkeit der Projektile infolge des kurzen
Rohrlaufes und der daraus resultierenden stark gekrümmten Flugbahn ein Zielen
über 500 m schwierig war. Aufgrund der verlustreichen Kämpfe und des
Verschleißes bei den im meist unwegsamen Gelände zurückgelegten großen
Entfernungen hatten die Verbände bereits Mitte Juli bis zu 50 % Ausfälle an
Panzern IV, von denen der Großteil aber wieder instandgesetzt werden konnte. Bis
zum Ende des Jahres beliefen sich die Totalverluste der Panzer IV an allen
Kriegsschauplätzen auf 378 Stück, was über 66 % des Juni-Bestandes darstellte.
miniatur|Die späteren Ausführungen waren dem T-34 bis zur Einführung des T34/85
weit überlegen Erst mit der 1942 eingeführten langen 7,5-cm-Kwk L/43 konnten
alle feindlichen Panzer wirksam bekämpft werden. Jetzt hatte er endgültig seine
Rolle als Unterstützungspanzer mit der des Kampfpanzers getauscht. Obwohl ab
1943 mit den kampfwertgesteigerten Ausführungen das Ende seiner Ausbaufähigkeit
endgültig erreicht war und es ab jetzt nur noch um die Erhaltung der Kampfkraft
gehen konnte, galt er immer noch als kampfstarkes Fahrzeug. So war die neue
7,5-cm-KwK mit ihren 48 Kaliberlängen allen feindlichen Panzern des Jahres 1943
überlegen. Dieser taktische Vorteil wurde jedoch zunehmend durch die zum Teil
enorme quantitative Überlegenheit der sowjetischen Panzer relativiert.

Die Masse der Panzerverbände bei der letzten deutschen Großoffensive an der
Ostfront während der Schlacht im Kursker Bogen bestand aus kampfwertgesteigerten
Panzern IV mit einer Frontpanzerung von 80 mm und der 7,5-cm-KwK L/48. Nicht der
Panther oder der Tiger, in die die oberste Führung ihre ganze Hoffnung gesetzt
hat, waren der Träger der Operation, sondern der Panzer IV. Diese Kampfwagen
fügten im Laufe der Schlacht den mit T-34 ausgerüsteten sowjetischen
Panzerformationen teils schwerste Verluste zu. Mit dem vermehrten Auftreten des
neuen T-34/85 im Laufe des Jahres 1944 verlor der Panzer IV jedoch zum größten
Teil seine Vorteile gegenüber den an der Front eingesetzten mittleren
sowjetischen Panzertypen.

Im Zuge der Landung in der Normandie traf der Panzer IV erstmals auf größere
Stückzahlen des M4 Sherman, nachdem er mit diesen schon zum Ende des
Afrikafeldzuges im Kampf stand. Anfangs war der Panzer IV noch relativ
erfolgreich, da er defensiv aus gut ausgekundschafteten und getarnten Stellungen
noch in ziemlich großer Anzahl kämpfte. Nur wenige alliierte Panzermodelle
konnten ihn aus großer Entfernung bekämpfen. Seine lange Kanone war der
75-mm-Kanone des Sherman weit überlegen. Bezüglich der Feuerkraft glichen die
Alliierten mit der britischen 17-Pfünder-Kanone aus, die unter anderem im
„Sherman Firefly“ oder im Achilles zum Einsatz kam. Wenn auch bis zum Ende der
Panzer IV ein relativ kampfstarkes Fahrzeug war und der Standardausführung des
Sherman überlegen, so war er quantitativ absolut chancenlos, zumal die totale
alliierte Luftüberlegenheit die Bewegung aller deutschen Panzerverbände bei Tage
so gut wie unmöglich machte.

Auffällig hohe Verluste traten zum Zeitpunkt des Endes der Schlacht von
Stalingrad und im Juli 1944 auf, als mit der Operation Bagration die Wehrmacht
die größte Niederlage in der deutschen Militärgeschichte zu verzeichnen hatte.
So wurden in den ersten zwei Monaten des Jahres 1943 rund 450 und allein im Juli
1944 etwa 420 Panzer IV als Totalverlust gemeldet. Dagegen waren die Verluste im
Juli 1943 mit rund 290 und im darauffolgenden Monat mit etwa 280 vernichteten
Panzern IV zum Zeitpunkt der Schlacht im Kursker Bogen nicht ungewöhnlich hoch.

miniatur|Trotz konventioneller Formgebung war der Panzer IV ein kampfstarkes
Fahrzeug Der Panzerkampfwagen IV galt als robustes und zuverlässiges
Kampffahrzeug. Seine anfänglich dünne Panzerung und kurze Kanone war der
Einsatzverwendung als Unterstützungspanzer geschuldet und entsprach dem
damaligen Stand der Technik. Sein Potenzial und seine Ausbaufähigkeit wurden
lange nicht erkannt, was sich unter anderem darin widerspiegelte, dass er in den
utopischen Planungen des Heereswaffenamtes vom Juli 1941 mit ihren
beabsichtigten 36 Panzerdivisionen und 15.440 Panzern nur mit 2160 Exemplaren
vorgesehen war, während von dem eigentlich nur als Übungsfahrzeug konzipierten
Panzer II mehr als doppelt soviele beschafft werden sollten.

Erst mit der verstärkten Panzerung und vor allem mit dem Einbau der langen
Kanone wandelte sich der Panzer IV vom Unterstützungspanzer zum Kampfpanzer, der
fast allen gegnerischen Standard-Modellen zu diesem Zeitpunkt entweder überlegen
oder zumindest ebenbürtig war und bis zum Ende des Krieges aufgrund seiner
zahlenmäßigen Verfügbarkeit und seiner Verbreitung das Rückgrat der deutschen
Panzerwaffe bildete. Infolge dessen galt der Panzerkampfwagen IV als der
wichtigste deutsche Panzer. Aufgrund seiner schon lange zurückliegenden
Entwicklungs- und Probezeit war der Panzer IV ein ausgereiftes und bewährtes
Fahrzeug, das im Gegensatz zum Panther oder Tiger nicht mit technischen
Problemen zu kämpfen hatte. Die Nachteile waren seine konventionelle Formgebung,
seine dem Panzerschutz abträglichen vielen Sichtklappen, die für unwegsames
Gelände zu schmalen Ketten sowie das durch Verstärkungen der Panzerung bei
Beibehaltung der Motorleistung immer ungünstiger werdende Leistungsgewicht.
Trotzdem war selbst im Jahre 1943 der Panzer IV dem T-34/76 aufgrund seiner
besseren Zieloptik, seines „Reichweitenüberhanges“ der langen Kanone, seiner
besseren Arbeitsaufteilung durch Kommandant und Richtschütze sowie seiner meist
besser ausgebildeten Besatzung und seiner Führung durch Funk deutlich überlegen.
An der Front kam jedoch immer mehr die zunehmende quantitative Unterlegenheit
der deutschen Panzertruppe zum Tragen. Zum Ende des Krieges war der Panzer IV
aufgrund konzeptioneller Einschränkungen nach zehnjähriger Dienstzeit vor allem
den modernen sowjetischen Panzern kaum noch gewachsen. So kam ein interner
Vergleich des Heereswaffenamtes mit den neuen Modellen T-34/85 und IS-2 zu dem
Ergebnis, dass der Panzer IV diesen Panzern in Sachen Feuerkraft weit unterlegen
war. Aufgrund der absoluten quantitativen Unterlegenheit war es irrelevant, dass
er von den Alliierten bis Kriegsende als ernstzunehmender Gegner wahrgenommen
wurde und den meisten westlichen Panzern zumindest ebenbürtig oder – wie der
Standardausführung des Sherman – überlegen war.

Wie der Panzerkampfwagen III fand auch der Panzer IV Verwendung in der Roten
Armee, wo er die Bezeichnung T-4 erhielt. Die erbeuteten Fahrzeuge wurden
hauptsächlich 1942 und 1943 eingesetzt. So besaß die Westfront im August 1942 in
zwei selbstständigen Panzerbataillonen insgesamt 50 ehemals deutsche Panzer,
darunter sieben Panzerkampfwagen IV. Ein Jahr später belief sich der Bestand auf
elf Panzer IV. Auch in der Nordkaukasusfront kamen solche Fahrzeuge zum Einsatz,
darunter auch in Angriffsoperationen. In den letzten zwei Kriegsjahren änderte
sich die Einsatzverwendung. Die erbeuteten Panzer IV wurden jetzt zu
Infiltrationszwecken genutzt, indem sie mit Hoheitskennzeichen der Wehrmacht die
deutschen Truppen täuschen sollten. Der Kommandeur der 4. Panzerarmee,
Generaloberst Leljuschenko, berichtete, dass der Panzer IV hierfür besser
geeignet war als der Panther.

R. N. Ulanow, Testfahrer von diversen sowjetischen, deutschen und alliierten
Panzern in Kubinka schilderte in seinen Erfahrungsberichten, dass der
Panzerkampfwagen IV leicht zu fahren war, ein komfortables Platzangebot hatte
und im Vergleich zum T-34 insgesamt leiser war. Negativ wurde der hohe
Benzinverbrauch, die Wärme- und Geräuschentwicklung des neben dem Fahrer
befindlichen Getriebes und die stark eingeschränkte Möglichkeit des
Notausstieges der Besatzung aufgrund der Seitenschürzen bewertet.

miniatur|Von Israel im Sechstagekrieg erbeuteter Panzer IV Der Verbündete Ungarn
erhielt 1942 insgesamt 32 Panzer IV mit der kurzen Kanone und zum Kriegsende
noch einige neue Modelle. Bulgarien erhielt 1943 88 Fahrzeuge, von denen ein
Teil noch viele Jahre als eingegrabene Bunker an der bulgarisch-türkischen
Grenze verwendet wurden. Im gleichen Zeitraum wie Bulgarien erhielt auch
Rumänien eine ähnliche Anzahl von Panzern IV, von denen einige nach dem
Regierungswechsel und der Kriegserklärung an Deutschland gegen Einheiten der
Wehrmacht eingesetzt wurden. Die Türkei erhielt 1943 sechs fabrikneue Fahrzeuge.
Auch Kroatien erhielt einige der letzten Ausführungen. Im Jahre 1944 kaufte
Finnland 18 Panzerkampfwagen IV, die aber zu spät für einen Kriegseinsatz zur
Auslieferung kamen. Die letzten Fahrzeuge wurden 1962 von der finnischen Armee
ausgemustert. Ebenfalls 1944 erhielt Spanien eine größere Anzahl Panzern IV, die
noch bis in die fünfziger Jahre genutzt wurden. In Nordafrika erbeutete
Panzer IV wurden nach dem Krieg an Syrien und Jordanien übergeben, wo sie
eingegraben in festen Stellungen noch im Sechstagekrieg zum Einsatz kamen und
von der israelischen Armee zerstört oder erbeutet wurden.

Wie der Tauchpanzer III wurde auch der Panzer IV durch die gleichen
Umrüstmaßnahmen tauchfähig gemacht, um an der Invasion Englands teilzunehmen. Im
August 1940 standen 42 Tauchpanzer IV bereit. Nachdem dieser Plan verworfen
worden war nahmen sie zusammen mit den 168 umgerüsteten Panzern III am
Russlandfeldzug teil, indem sie am ersten Tag des Unternehmens erfolgreich den
Fluss Bug durchquerten.

Ab Frühjahr 1944 kam es zu einer kleinen Serie des Panzerbefehlswagen IV. Sie
waren bewaffnet wie der normale Panzerkampfwagen IV, verfügten jedoch über eine
erweiterte Funkausrüstung und zusätzliche Antennen. Der Ladeschütze fungierte
dabei als zweiter Funker. Bis Herbst wurden 89 Stück aus instandgesetzten
Fahrzeugen umgerüstet, während weitere acht aus der laufenden Produktion der
Ausführung H entnommen wurden.

Für die Panzerartillerieregimenter wurde der Panzerbeobachtungswagen IV
erschaffen, der ebenfalls wie die ursprünglichen Panzerkampfwagen IV bewaffnet
war. Statt der normalen Antenne hatte das Fahrzeug am Heck eine Sternantenne und
eine zusätzliche Antenne auf dem Turmdach. Dem Kommandanten stand ein
ausfahrbares Periskop zur Verfügung. Von Herbst 1944 bis Frühjahr 1945 wurden an
die Truppe 96 Stück ausgeliefert.

Das bewährte und in großer Anzahl verfügbare Fahrgestell diente als Grundlage
für eine Vielzahl von Waffenträgern und Selbstfahrlafetten. Auch in dieser
Verwendung war das Chassis das meistgenutzte Fahrgestell der deutschen
Wehrmacht.

模板:Hauptartikel miniatur|Sturmpanzer Brummbär Bei dem auch Brummbär genannten
„Sturmpanzer IV“ handelte es sich um ein schwer gepanzertes Sturmgeschütz, das
mit dem schweren Infanteriegeschütz 33 bewaffnet war. Das ab 1943 verwendete
Fahrzeug wurde eingeführt, da sich die bisherigen Sturmgeschütze zu Jagdpanzern
entwickelten und die Infanterie nun als Ersatz eine unter Panzerschutz stehende
großkalibrige Waffe forderte. Das eingebaute 150-mm-Geschütz sIG 33 entwickelte
eine hohe Spreng- und Splitterwirkung. Das vorne 100 mm und seitlich 50 mm stark
gepanzerte Fahrzeug war zwar mit 28 Tonnen überlastet, bewährte sich jedoch an
der Front und war auch für Straßenkämpfe gut geeignet.

模板:Hauptartikel Wie auch das Sturmgeschütz III war das StuG IV ein turmloses
Fahrzeug mit einer in einem Aufbau eingebetteten langen 7,5-cm-Kanone. Mit nur
einem Zehntel der Stückzahlen des StuG III erreichte es bei weitem nicht dessen
Bedeutung. Das organisatorisch der Artillerietruppe unterstellte Fahrzeug stand
ab Herbst 1943 bei den Sturmgeschützabteilungen im Einsatz und diente in
einzelnen Panzerregimentern auch als Ersatz für fehlende Kampfpanzer.

模板:Hauptartikel miniatur|Jagdpanzer IV (70) Bei dem ab Oktober 1943 von VOMAG
produzierten und ab Anfang 1944 im Einsatz stehenden Jagdpanzer IV handelte es
sich um einen Panzerjäger, der mit der langen 7,5-cm-Kanone mit 48 Kaliberlängen
bewaffnet war. Ab August 1944 gab es von VOMAG und in geringerer Stückzahl von
Alkett eine überarbeitete Version mit einer leicht abgewandelten Form der
überlangen 7,5-cm-Kanone mit 70 Kaliberlängen aus dem Panther. Im Gegensatz zum
Panzerkampfwagen IV hatten die Fahrzeuge von VOMAG eine nach allen Seiten
vorteilhaftere abgeschrägte Panzerung. Obwohl vor allem bei den Fahrzeugen mit
der überlangen Kanone die Buglastigkeit eine eingeschränkte Lenkbarkeit im
Gelände zur Folge hatte, galten die Jagdpanzer IV aufgrund ihrer niedrigen
Feuerhöhe, ihrer starken Frontpanzerung und ihrer beträchtlichen Feuerkraft als
äußerst wirkungsvolle Panzerjäger.

模板:Hauptartikel miniatur|Panzerjäger Nashorn Bei dem ab 1943 im Einsatz
stehenden Panzerjäger mit dem Suggestivnamen „Nashorn“ handelte es sich um eine
Selbstfahrlafette, auf der die 8,8-cm-PaK 43, eine Variante der bekannten
Acht-Acht, in einem leichten und nach hinten und oben offenen Aufbau aufgesetzt
war. Als Chassis diente der Geschützwagen (GW) III/IV, der aus dem Fahrgestell
des Panzers IV und beim Antriebsstrang aus Bauteilen des Panzers III bestand.
Beim GW wurde der Motor nach vorne verlegt und direkt hinter dem Getriebe
eingebaut, wodurch ein großzügiger Kampfraum im Heck entstand. Die den Schweren
Panzerjäger-Abteilungen zugeteilten Panzerjäger leisteten zwar aufgrund ihrer
überlegenen Waffe einen wertvollen Beitrag bei der Panzerabwehr, galten aber
aufgrund ihres offenen Kampfraumes und ihrer unzulänglichen Panzerung bis zur
Einführung des Jagdpanthers nur als Übergangslösung.

模板:Hauptartikel Das Fahrgestell der Panzerhaubitze Hummel war ebenfalls ein
Geschützwagen III/IV, auf dem eine 150-mm-Haubitze in einem leicht gepanzerten
und oben offenen Aufbau installiert war. Die dem Panzerartillerieregiment einer
Panzerdivision unterstellte Haubitze kam im Mai 1943 an die Front. Obwohl sie
nur ein eingeschränktes Seitenrichtfeld, eine geringe Munitionsausstattung von
18 Granaten und einen hohen Aufzug hatte, bewährte sich die Panzerhaubitze an
der Front.

miniatur|Wirbelwind mit 2-cm-Flakvierling 模板:Hauptartikel Die starke alliierte
Luftüberlegenheit, die eine Bewegung der Panzerverbände bei Tage immer
schwieriger machte, führte ab 1943 zur Planung und ab 1944 zum Bau von
Selbstfahrlafetten mit dem Fahrgestell des Panzerkampfwagens IV, auf dem
Flugabwehrkanonen montiert wurden. Die Flakpanzer, die den Panzerverbänden
direkt folgen sollten, galten aufgrund ihres oben offenen Kampfraumes und ihrer
teils erst abzuklappenden Seitenwände als Provisorium. Vom Flakpanzer IV gab es
insgesamt drei Serienmodelle und einen Prototypen:

[[Datei:Stegpz IV - Bild 041.jpg|thumb|Stegpanzer IV als Modell in der WTS]]
Bereits im Jahre 1939 gab das Heereswaffenamt 50 Brückenlegefahrzeuge in
Auftrag, an dessen Herstellung sich Krupp und Magirus beteiligten. Die ersten
Brückenlegepanzer IV erhielt im März 1940 die 1. Panzer-Division. Bis Mai
standen 20 Brückenlegepanzer mit ausgebildetem Personal zur Verfügung. Es war
vorgesehen, die erste bis fünfte Panzerdivision damit auszurüsten, wobei jede
Division drei Fahrzeuge erhalten sollte. Die Fahrzeuge gab es in zwei
Ausführungen: die Krupp-Variante konnte mit einem 9 m langen Brückenteil
Geländeeinschnitte überbrücken, während die Magirus-Variante zum Überwinden von
Hindernissen gedacht war. Dazu setzte ein Fahrzeug seine Brücke ab, die am
vorderen Ende durch Pfeiler hoch aufgestützt war. Danach kam ein zweites
Fahrzeug und legte das nun wieder nach unten zeigende Brückenteil ab, womit
Hindernisse – wie zum Beispiel eine Panzersperre – überfahren werden konnten.
Nachdem Ende Mai weitere 60 Brückenleger zusätzlich zu den 20 bestehenden
bestellt worden waren, wurde dieser Auftrag bereits einen Monat später
storniert, da die Fahrgestelle zur Produktionssteigerung des ursprünglichen
Panzerkampfwagens verwendet werden sollten. Versuche, die Brückenteile mit LKWs
zu verladen, verliefen unbefriedigend, so dass 1941 der Brückenlegezug der
Panzerpionierkompanien aufgelöst wurde, da keine entsprechenden Fahrzeuge zur
weiteren Anschaffung bereitstanden. Des Weiteren stellte Magirus zwei
„Infanterie-Sturmstege“ her. Dabei war auf dem Fahrgestell des Panzers IV eine
lange, ausziehbare und schwenkbare Drehleiter installiert, die ähnlich wie eine
Feuerwehrdrehleiter über Hindernisse gelegt wurde. Zwei dieser Fahrzeuge wurden
gebaut, die in Frankreich und schließlich in der Sowjetunion eingesetzt wurden.

miniatur|Drei dieser 60-cm-Granaten konnte der im Hintergrund zu sehende
Munitionsträger mitführen Im Jahre 1941 lieferte Krupp-Gruson eine
Spezialausführung des Panzer-IV–Fahrgestelles als Munitionsfahrzeug für den
überschweren Mörser Karl aus. Je zwei dieser Munitionsschlepper sollten einen
Mörser begleiten. Die Fahrzeuge hatten einen Aufbau, in dem drei der 2,2 t
wiegenden 60-cm-Granaten mitgeführt wurden. Mit einem fest eingebauten
benzin-elektrischen 2,5-t-Kran konnten die Granaten direkt zum Mörser befördert
werden.

Im Herbst 1944 wurden 36 Bergepanzer IV an die Truppe ausgeliefert, die aus
Umbauten von aus der Instandsetzung entnommenen Panzerkampfwagen IV entstanden
waren. Auf dem Fahrgestell befand sich ein kastenförmiger Holzaufbau und ein
kleiner Kran.

Im Frühsommer 1942 wurden von Klöckner-Humboldt-Deutz zwei Panzerfähren
hergestellt, bei denen das Fahrgestell des Panzers IV mit einem Wasserantrieb
versehen wurde. Zusätzlich erhielt es einen großen pontonartigen
Auftriebskörper, der das Fahrzeug schwimmfähig machte. Die Panzerfähren sollten
entweder einen – von Kässbohrer hergestellten – schwimmfähigen Anhänger hinter
sich herziehen oder zwischen sich eine kleine Brücke einhängen, auf der Panzer
bis zu einem Gewicht von 24 t über Gewässer transportiert werden konnten. Zu
einer weiteren Fertigung kam es nicht, da aufgrund der ansteigenden
Gefechtsgewichte der Panzer die Betriebssicherheit dieser Tandemfähre nicht mehr
gewährleistet werden konnte.

miniatur|Panzerjäger mit Kanone K18 Im Frühjahr 1941 wurden von Krupp zwei
Prototypen einer Panzerjäger-Selbstfahrlafette hergestellt, die mit der Schweren
10,5-cm-Kanone 18 bewaffnet waren. Die offizielle Bezeichnung lautete
„10,5 cm K 18 auf Panzer-Selbstfahrlafette IVa“. Die Projektierung der Fahrzeuge
erfolgte unter dem Gesichtspunkt der Bunkerbekämpfung und der Abwehr von
vermuteten schweren Panzern der Alliierten. Auf der Wanne des Panzers IV befand
sich ein vorne ausreichend und seitlich leicht gepanzerter Aufbau, der im
hinteren Bereich oben offen war. Nachdem die Fahrzeuge für den Westfeldzug zu
spät kamen, sollten sie bei dem geplanten Angriff auf Gibraltar eingesetzt
werden. Nachdem dieses Unternehmen abgesagt worden war, nahmen sie bei der
3. Panzer-Division am Russlandfeldzug teil. Die von der Artillerietruppe
stammende und leicht modifizierte K 18 war eine enorm durchschlagskräftige
Waffe, die jeden sowjetischen Panzer auch auf große Entfernung zerstören konnte.
Im Einsatz wurde eines der Fahrzeuge durch Selbstzündung der Munition zerstört,
das andere im Herbst 1941 nach Deutschland zurückgeführt. Zu einer
Serienproduktion kam es nicht, da man sich stattdessen für die Herstellung des
Nashorn entschied.

miniatur|Prototyp einer Panzerhaubitze auf verkürztem Fahrgestell Vom
Unternehmen Krupp wurden erste Versuche mit einer Panzerhaubitze durchgeführt
und Ende 1942 acht Prototypen einer Selbstfahrlafette hergestellt. Als
Fahrgestell wurde ein um zwei Laufrollen verkürztes Laufwerk des
Panzerkampfwagens IV verwendet. Die Bewaffnung bestand aus der leichten
10,5-cm-Feldhaubitze leFH 18, die in einem oben offenen Kampfraum eingebaut war
und deren Schussreichweite 10,5 km betrug. Das Geschütz hatte ein Richtfeld von
jeweils 35° nach beiden Seiten und 40° nach oben. Mit einer Besatzung von fünf
Mann, einem Munitionsvorrat von 60 Schuss, einer Frontpanzerung von 20 mm und
einer Seitenpanzerung von 15 mm betrug das Gesamtgewicht 17 Tonnen. Anders als
der Panzer IV war die Panzerhaubitze mit einem Sechs-Zylinder-Ottomotor von
Maybach ausgerüstet, der 180 PS Leistung erbrachte. In der Serienproduktion
sollte ein stärkerer Sechs-Zylinder-Motor mit 320 PS eingebaut werden. Die
offizielle Bezeichnung lautete „leFH 18/1 (Sf) auf GW IVb“ (Sd.Kfz. 165/1). Die
acht Panzerhaubitzen kam im November 1942 zum Truppenversuch an die Ostfront. Da
aufgrund des Kriegsverlaufes die Herstellung einer solchen Spezialkonstruktion
nicht mehr zu vertreten war, beschloss man, ausschließlich bereits vorhandene
Fahrgestelle zu nutzen, so dass die leichte Feldhaubitze stattdessen in die
Panzerhaubitze Wespe eingebaut wurde. Die acht Prototypen wurden 1944 zu
„Panzerjäger IVb (E 39)“ bezeichneten Panzerjägern umgebaut, wobei sie einen
geschlossenen, vorne 80 mm und seitlich 30 mm stark gepanzerten Aufbau und als
Waffe die 7,5-cm-Pak 39 L/48 erhielten.

模板:Hauptartikel miniatur|Krupp-Prototyp Heuschrecke Eine der wichtigsten Punkte
bei den 1942 festgelegten Anforderungen an die Panzerartillerie war neben der
Absetzbarkeit des Geschützes die Möglichkeit einer Rundumfeuerung. An der
Entwicklung solcher Panzerhaubitzen unter dem Namen „Heuschrecke“ beteiligten
sich Rheinmetall und Krupp, die Anfang 1943 ihre Prototypen vorführten. Das
Rheinmetall-Fahrzeug hatte eine leichte 10,5-cm-Feldhaubitze in einem einfachen
oben offenen Aufbau. Der Krupp-Prototyp dagegen besaß einen geschlossenen
Drehturm mit abgeschrägten Seiten und einer Rundumpanzerung von 15 mm. Beide
Panzerhaubitzen konnten den Turm mit Hilfe einer seitlich angebrachten
Hebevorrichtung auf eine ebenfalls mitgeführte einfache Bettung ablasten. Danach
konnte das Fahrgestell als Munitionsschlepper oder für andere
Versorgungsaufgaben verwendet werden. Die projektierte leichte Feldhaubitze
10,5-cm-leFH 43 konnte auch vom Fahrzeug aus eingesetzt werden; in beiden Fällen
hatte die Waffe ein Seitenrichtfeld von 360 Grad. Zu einem Serienbau kam es
nicht, da keine Kapazitäten für die Produktion solcher Spezialfahrzeuge für die
Panzerartillerie vorhanden waren.

Im Sommer 1944 sah das „Vorläufige Richtwertprogramm IV“ noch eine zahlreiche
Verwendung des Geschützwagens III/IV vor, der nach leichten Modifikationen als
Einheitsfahrgestell in Großserie gehen sollte. Folgende Projekte waren ab
Frühjahr 1945 vorgesehen: Sturmgeschütz III/IV mit 7,5-cm-Kanone L/70 (800
Stück/Monat), Sturmhaubitze III/IV mit 10,5-cm-Haubitze (125 Stück/Monat),
Sturmpanzer III/IV (20 Stück/Monat), schwere Panzerhaubitze (25 Stück/Monat),
leichte Panzerhaubitze (45 Stück/Monat) und Flakpanzer III/IV Kugelblitz (30
Stück/Monat). Der Kriegsverlauf machte alle Planungen obsolet.

miniatur|Der einzige Prototyp mit hydrostatischem Antrieb Im Jahre 1944 wurde im
Augsburger Werk von ZF ein Prototyp mit einem ungewöhnlichen Antriebskonzept
hergestellt. Ein Panzer der Ausführung H erhielt statt des normalen Getriebes
einen Flüssigkeitsantrieb. Dabei waren hinter dem normalen Verbrennungsmotor
zwei Ölpumpen angebracht, die ihrerseits zwei Ölmotoren antrieben. Ein
Taumelscheibenantrieb leitete die Kraft über ein Untersetzungsgetriebe an die
hinten liegenden Antriebsräder weiter. Gleichzeitig wurde auch das
Turmschwenkwerk hydraulisch betrieben. Statt der zwei Lenkhebel stand dem Fahrer
ein sichelförmiges Lenkrad zur Verfügung, mit dessen Lenkbewegungen zwei
Steuerzylinder betätigt wurden, die ihrerseits das Volumen der Ölpumpen
regulierten und somit die anliegende Kraft an den zwei Antriebsrädern regelten.
Der einzige gebaute Prototyp kam nicht zum Einsatz und wurde nach dem Krieg nach
Amerika verschifft und dort Fahrversuchen unterzogen. Diese mussten aufgrund
fehlender Ersatzteile schließlich eingestellt werden. Fahrberichte liegen nicht
vor. Das Fahrzeug steht heute in einem Museum der US-Army in Maryland.

miniatur|Nahaufnahme eines leicht beschädigten Turmes. Von den zwei – derzeit
geschlossenen – Sichtöffnungen entfiel bei späteren Ausführungen die rechte
Anders als beim Panzer III hatte der Panzer IV einen Turmboden, der mit
Tragarmen am Turmring befestigt war und sich mit dem Turm bewegte. Wie bei fast
allen deutschen Panzerkampfwagen saß der Ladeschütze rechts und der Richtschütze
links von der Hauptwaffe. Der Kommandant saß mittig im Turm hinter der Waffe und
hatte eine eigene Kuppel mit Sehschlitzen zur Verfügung, die mit außenliegenden
Stahlschiebern geschlossen werden konnten. Richt- und Ladeschütze hatten jeweils
auf beiden Turmseiten eine zunächst einteilig und später zweiteilig ausgeführte
Ausstiegsklappe, in der zusätzlich eine Sichtöffnung und eine Pistolenklappe
integriert waren. Bei den ersten Ausführungen befand sich im Turmheck rechts und
links eine MPi-Klappe zur Nahabwehr. In der Turmfront befand sich rechts und
links je eine mit einer Schutzklappe abdeckbare Sichtöffnung, von der später die
rechte entfiel. Der rundum drehbare Turm saß auf einem Schulter-Kugellagerring.
Als einziger deutscher Panzerkampfwagen besaß der Panzer IV ein elektrisch
angetriebenes Turmschwenkwerk, das über einen Druckschalter am Handrad gesteuert
wurde. Die Energie lieferte ein Stromerzeugungsaggregat mit einem 15 PS starken
Zweizylinder-Zweitaktmotor von DKW, so dass in einer festen Stellung der
Hauptmotor nicht mitlaufen musste. Das Höhenrichten der Kanone erfolgte mit
einem Handrad, wobei auch der Turm per Hand geschwenkt werden konnte. Dem
Richtschützen stand ein Turmpositionsanzeiger zur Verfügung. Der Kommandant
hatte eine ähnliche Anzeige in seiner Kuppel, so dass er mit dieser Skala dem
Richtschützen die ungefähre Position eines von ihm gesichteten Zieles mitteilen
konnte. Die Walzenblende diente der Aufnahme der Hauptwaffe mitsamt der
Rohrwiege, dem Luftvorhohler und der Rohrbremse sowie des MG 34. Die Öffnung des
links neben der Kanone befindlichen Zielfernrohres war so klein, dass auf eine
Schutzklappe verzichtet werden konnte. Die Munition für die Hauptwaffe wurde –
größtenteils vertikal – an den Seitenwänden der Wanne, im hinteren Seitenbereich
des Gefechtsstandes an der Motortrennwand und hinter dem Fahrer im Chassis
untergebracht.

Der Fahrer saß vorne links und der Funker rechts, wobei sich zwischen beiden das
Schaltgetriebe befand. Beiden Besatzungsmitgliedern stand eine eigene
Einstiegsluke zur Verfügung. Der Fahrer orientierte sich nach vorn durch einen
Sehschlitz mit einem schützenden Glasbaustein, der mit einem herunterklappbaren
Panzerriegel abgedeckt werden konnte. In diesem Fall schaute der Fahrer durch
ein Periskop, dessen Ausblicksöffnungen durch zwei Bohrlöcher oberhalb des
Visieres gingen. Bei den Ausführungen A, D und E mit ihrem vorgezogenem
Fahrererker konnte der Fahrer durch eine MPi-Klappe rechts von ihm nach vorne
schießen. Zusätzlich hatte er auf der linken Seite eine Beobachtungsöffnung, die
durch eine Außenklappe abgedeckt werden konnte. Eine gleiche Sichtöffnung befand
sich auf der anderen Seite für den Funker. Dieser bediente neben dem Funkgerät
das in einer Kugelpfanne befindliche Maschinengewehr. Unterhalb vor ihm hing ein
Rahmen zur Aufnahme der zwei Umformer für den Sender und Empfänger und links von
ihm oberhalb des Getriebes befand sich die eigentliche Funkanlage. Es handelte
sich im Übrigen um fast die gleiche Funkausrüstung wie im Panzer III. Nur der
Kommandant, der Fahrer und der Funker waren mit einem Kopfhörer und einem
Kehlkopfmikrofon ausgestattet und damit an die Funkanlage angeschlossen, wobei
diese nur durch den Funker alleine bedient werden konnte. Die 2 m lange
Stabantenne aus Hartkupferblech befand sich mittig an der rechten Wannenseite
und konnte aus dem Inneren nach hinten auf eine Holzschiene oberhalb der rechten
Kettenabdeckung in die Ruhestellung umgeklappt werden. In dieser Holzschiene
befand sich auch noch eine Reserveantenne.

Der ab der Ausführung „B“ eingebaute Maybach-12-Zylinder-Ottomotor mit 265 PS
Dauerleistung und 300 PS Maximalleistung befand sich im Heck des Panzers. Die
Kühlluft wurde durch zwei an der rechten Fahrzeugseite angebrachte Lüfter von
rechts eingesaugt und nach Durchströmung der Kühler an der linken Seite des
Heckpanzer wieder abgeführt. Ähnlich wie beim Panzer III ging der Kraftfluss
über eine Gelenkwelle unter dem Kampfraum zu einer trockenen
Dreischeibenkupplung und von dort zum Sechsgang-Getriebe. Vom Getriebe aus
verlief der Antrieb über einen Kegeltrieb zu dem Kupplungs-Lenkgetriebe, das den
Kraftfluss über die außen an der Wanne angeflanschten Seitenvorgelege zu den
Kettenantriebsrädern regulierte. Vorne auf der flachen Bugpanzerplatte befanden
sich für das Lenkgetriebe zwei Wartungsklappen mit jeweils einer kleinen
Entlüftungshutze der Lenkbremse. Die 1270 kg schwere Kette wurde mit dem hinten
liegenden Leitrad gespannt. Die Tankkapazität betrug 470 Liter, die sich aus
drei im Motorraum untergebrachten Tanks mit je 220 l, 140 l und 110 l
zusammensetzten. Der Zusatztank für den Benzingenerator umfasste knapp 20 Liter.
Auf dem am Wannenheck befindlichen Auspuff war noch ein Nebelkerzen-Wurfgerät
installiert.



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saul_Perlmutter

Saul Perlmutter was born one of three children in the Jewish family of professor
emeritus of chemical and biomolecular engineering at University of Pennsylvania
Daniel D. Perlmutter and professor emerita of Temple University’s School of
Social Administration Felice (Feige) D. Perlmutter (née Davidson). His maternal
grandfather, the Yiddish teacher Samuel Davidson (1903–1989), immigrated to
Canada (and then with his wife Chaika Newman to New York) from the Bessarabian
town of Floreşti in 1919.

Perlmutter spent his childhood in the Mount Airy neighborhood of Philadelphia
attending Greene Street Friends School for the elementary grades, followed by
Germantown Friends School for grades 7 through 12. He graduated with an AB in
physics from Harvard magna cum laude in 1981 and received his PhD in physics
from the University of California, Berkeley in 1986. Perlmutter's PhD thesis
titled "An Astrometric Search for a Stellar Companion to the Sun" described the
development and use of an automated telescope to search for Nemesis candidates
under Richard A. Muller. At the same time, he was using this telescope to search
for Nemesis and supernova, which would lead him to his award winning work in
cosmology. Perlmutter attributes the idea for an automated supernova search to
1968 Nobel laureate Luis Alvarez, who shared his idea with Perlmutter's research
adviser.

Perlmutter heads the Supernova Cosmology Project at Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory. It was this team along with the competing High-z Supernova Search
Team led by Riess and Schmidt, which found evidence of the accelerating
expansion of the universe based on observing Type Ia supernova in the distant
universe. Type Ia supernova occurs whenever a white dwarf star gains enough
additional mass to pass above the Chandrasekhar limit, usually by stealing
additional mass from a companion star. Since all Type Ia supernovae are believed
to occur in essentially the same way, they form a standard candle whose
intrinsic luminosity can be assumed to be approximately the same in all cases.
By measuring the apparent luminosity of the explosion from Earth, researchers
can then infer the distance to supernova. Comparing this inferred distance to
the apparent redshift of the explosion allows the observer to measure both the
distance and relative velocity of the supernova.

The Supernova Cosmology Project concluded that these distant supernovae were not
receding as quickly as would be expected due to the Hubble expansion alone, and,
by inference, the expansion of the universe must have been accelerated over the
billions of years since the supernovae occurred. The High-z Team also came to a
similar conclusion. The two teams' reports were published within weeks of each
other, and their conclusions were readily accepted by the scientific community
due to corroborating theories. This conclusion has subsequently been supported
by other lines of evidence. These findings initiated new lines of research to
understand the nature of the universe, including the exploration of dark matter.
For this work Perlmutter was awarded the 2011 Nobel Prize in Physics, shared
jointly with Riess and Schmidt.

Perlmutter is also a lead investigator in the Supernova/Acceleration Probe
project, which aims to build a satellite dedicated to finding and studying more
supernovae in the distant universe. This will help to better constrain the rate
at which the universe is accelerating.

He is also a participant in the Berkeley Earth Surface Temperature project,
which aims to increase our understanding of recent global warming through
improved analyses of climate data.

In 2002, Perlmutter won the Department of Energy's E. O. Lawrence Award in
Physics. In 2003, he was awarded the California Scientist of the Year Award,
and, in 2005, he won the John Scott Award and the Padua Prize. In 2006, he
shared the Shaw Prize in Astronomy with Adam Riess and Brian P. Schmidt. The
same year, Perlmutter won the Antonio Feltrinelli International Prize.

Perlmutter and his team shared the 2007 Gruber Cosmology Prize (a $500,000
award) with Schmidt and the High-Z Team for discovering the accelerating
expansion of the universe.

In 2011, Perlmutter and Riess were named co-recipients of the Albert Einstein
Medal.

Perlmutter shared the 2011 Nobel Prize in Physics with Riess and Schmidt. The
Nobel Prize includes a SEK 10 million cash award (approximately USD 1.5
million). Perlmutter will receive one-half of the cash prize, while Riess and
Schmidt will split the other half.

Saul Perlmutter has two sisters: Shira Perlmutter (b. 1956), a lawyer, and Tova
Perlmutter (b. 1967), a nonprofit executive. He is married to Laura Nelson, an
anthropologist at Cal State East Bay, and has one daughter, Noa.



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Huz_Gyah

Huz Gyah (Sawgun:胡佳; 1873 nienz 7 nyied 25 hauh seng youq Baekging), Cunghvaz
Yinzminz Gunghozgoz seivei hozdunggya. De hawj Cunghgoz minzcuj yindung,
seiqhenz baujhoq yindung, ganggiz AIDS dengj guh haujlai hung lo. Huz Gyah dwg
June Fourth Heritage & Culture Association cujsiz, Baekging Aizhixing yezvei
ciuqguh cujyin. De lij gya haeuj bauj canglingzyiengz gij hung. Youq 2008 nienz
12 nyied ndaej SSaharov ciengj.

On December 27, 2007, Hu was detained as part of a crackdown on dissents during
the Christmas holiday season. Reporters Without Borders said that “The political
police have taken advantage of the international community’s focus on Pakistan
to arrest one of the foremost representatives of the peaceful struggle for free
expression in China.” The decision to take him into custody was made after
peasant leaders in several Chinese provinces issued a manifesto demanding
broader land rights for peasants whose property had been confiscated for
development. On April 3, 2008, he was sentenced to 3.5 years in jail. Hu pleaded
not guilty on charges of "inciting subversion of state power" at his trial in
March 2008. He was released at 2:30 am (Beijing time) on Sunday, June 26th,
2011.

Hu's parents were students at Tsinghua University in Beijing and Nankai
University in Tianjin in 1957 when they were labeled as rightists during the
Anti-Rightist Movement under Mao Zedong.模板:Cn They were assigned to work in
remote provinces of Hebei, Gansu, and Hunan. His parents often had to live apart
until 1978, when Deng Xiaoping came to power and political label held against
them was dropped.

In 1996 Hu graduated from the Beijing School of Economics (now Capital
University of Economics and Trade, 首都经济贸易大学), where he majored in information
engineering.

In January 2006 Hu married Zeng Jinyan, with whom he has an infant daughter, and
who was included in Time magazine's 100 Heroes and Pioneers for her blogging
after his arrest in February 2008 for voicing his indignation at China as the
host of the 2008 Summer Olympics. Both his wife and daughter were held in house
arrest and harassed by the Ministry of State Security, and eventually
disappeared one day before the opening ceremony of the Olympics in Beijing.

模板:BLP sources section Hu became interested in environmental issues while in
university and participated in several environmental organizations including the
Friends of Nature, led by Liang Congjie, and the 1997 Green Camp university
student environmental camp led by Tang Xiyang. In 1998 Hu Jia was involved in
rescuing some wild elk that were threatened by severe flooding that year. Hu was
subsequently involved in efforts to protect the Tibetan Antelope that were being
slaughtered for their fur.

In July 2000, the writer Wang Lixiong introduced Hu to AIDS activist Wan
Yanhai.模板:Citation needed Afterwards Hu Jia became involved in AIDS prevention
work and took an active part in the AIZIBING Institute of Health Education AIDS,
which Wan Yanhai had founded.模板:Citation needed As one of the founders Loving
Source a non-governmental organization and advocacy group for individuals with
AIDS, Hu Jia has been involved in helping people suffering from AIDS and AIDS
orphans in Henan province. He has criticized the government over its treatment
of people with AIDS.模板:Citation needed According to Amnesty International, Hu
has since resigned from Loving Source to prevent the authorities from harassing
the group.

Hu has also been involved in campaigns to release political prisoners, including
Wan Yanhai in August–September 2002 and the cyber-dissident Liu Di ("The
Stainless Steel Rat").模板:Citation needed In 2003, Hu Jia lodged a letter of
complaint to the European Court of Human Rights over German Chancellor Gerhard
Schroeder's refusal to meet with the Dalai Lama.模板:Citation needed In 2005 he
participated in anti-Japanese demonstrations.

Hu insists on his rights as a citizen of the People's Republic in China. When
police detain him (often for planned activities and sometimes to ensure that he
is not active at sensitive times such as June 4, the anniversary of the
Tiananmen Square protests of 1989) Hu demands that the police state what
provision of Chinese law he is being held under. Hu says that the security
officers are generally unable to do so.模板:Citation needed

In 2006, Beijing Zhiaixing Information Counseling Center (formerly called
Aizhixing Institute of Health Education), a human rights advocacy group with
which Hu was affiliated,模板:Citation needed received combined grant of $179,113
from National Endowment for Democracy and US State Department for conducting
programs within China.

On February 16, 2006, Hu was detained for 41 days. His detention was not
acknowledged by the Chinese government.模板:Citation needed After his return to
his apartment in Beijing, where he lives with his wife Zeng Jinyan (also an AIDS
activist), Hu Jia was kept under house arrest until March 2007. Two months
later, on May 18, 2007, Hu Jia and his wife were placed under house arrest again
on charges of "harming state security." Hu Jia has remained active via emails
and blogs while under house arrests.

Using a web camera, Hu participated in a European parliamentary hearing in
Brussels in November 2007 about human rights in China. At the hearing he said:
“It is ironic that one of the people in charge of organizing the Olympic Games
is the head of the Bureau of Public Security, which is responsible for so many
human rights violations. It is very serious that the official promises are not
being kept before the games.”

On December 30, 2007, Hu was arrested at his home in Beijing by the Chinese
police for "inciting subvertion of state authority". His trial began in March
2008 on charges of "inciting subversion of state power and the socialist
system", stemming from interviews he gave to the foreign media and political
articles he wrote and published on the internet. The crime carries a maximum
sentence of five years in prison. On April 3, 2008, Hu was sentenced to three
years and six months in prison. Hu's wife Zeng Jinyan, after an April 2009
prison visit with Hu Jia, noted that his health is deteriorating because of
inadequate nutrition and medical care. He is thought to be suffering from a
liver condition.

In April 2010, Hu's family got to know that he was sent to prison hospital for
medical check of symptoms suspected to be liver cancer but no information of the
medical report was released to his family. Hu's wife Ms Zeng requested for the
detailed medical report but was denied access. She and Hu's mother requested for
medical parole but the prison administration rejected by saying that Hu's
disease is not liver cancer, and he might not be released for medical care even
if he had liver cancer.

On April 7, Ms Zeng published an open letter on Internet, requesting medical
parole of Mr. Hu. Shortly later, Ms Ai Xiaoming and Ms Cui Weiping, two renowned
university professors who are also active in human rights activities, published
an open letter on Internet, appealing public support for Ms Zeng's request of
medical parole of Mr. Hu. In less than 10 days, over 700 people endorsed the
open letter through email and web forms.

Hu was made an honorary citizen of Paris on April 21, 2008, the same day as was
the 14th Dalai Lama. On October 23, 2008, the European Parliament announced that
its Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought would be awarded to Hu Jia in December
2008.



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abu_Nuwas

Abu Nuwas（Sawahlahboz：ابونواس，Lahdinghva：Abū-Nuwās，750 nienz-810 nienz）,
Ahlahboz seiyinz. De seng youq Bohswh Ahvajswq, youq Bahswqlah mbwkmaj, miz
goetyiet Bohswh caeuq Ahlahboz. Doeklaeng youq Bahswqlah caeuq Guqfaz laeng
瓦利卜·伊本·侯巴卜、海莱夫·艾哈迈尔 hag sij sei. De doek gvaq Gujlanzging、Swnson, doeng rox
fapfaenz Ahlahboz、youhcwz、seilwd.
初到巴格达阿拔斯王朝王宫时，与某些大臣多有牵连，在政局发生突变时潜往埃及避难。30岁时辗转返回巴格达，撰写颂诗多篇，博得哈伦·拉希德和艾敏两位哈里发的赏识，成为
宫廷诗人。长于作饮酒歌，有“酒诗人”之称。思想豁朗，性格豪放，主张充分享受现实人生的欢乐，反对宗教禁欲和苦行。诗作题材广泛，除歌颂阿拔斯朝廷和劝善的诗篇外，尤以
赞美青春、美酒、爱情的抒情诗和描写宫殿、花园的写景诗以及调侃权贵、嘲弄群小的讽刺诗最为著名。语法严谨，辞藻优美，热情奔放，富于想象，诙谐生动，突破了传统诗歌的题
材和形式，为阿拉伯诗歌的发展开辟了新天地，对当时和后世的诗人影响很大。阿拉伯文学评论界认为他是阿拉伯文学黄金时代最伟大的新派诗人。遗留的诗篇经10世纪文学家伊斯
巴哈尼搜集整理，传世的有12000多句。《一千零一夜》中记载了许多他和哈里发哈伦·拉希德幽默有趣的故事。



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liuzgiuzgoz

Liuzgiuzgoz (Vah Liuzgiuz: 琉球國/るーちゅーくく) dwg aen cwnghauh guekgya ndeu. Youq gwnz
lizsij Liuzgiuz, Vuengzciuz Sangci Daih'it (第一尚氏王朝) caeuq Vuengzciuz Sangci
Daihngeih (第一尚氏王朝) caemh sawjyungh cwnghauh neix. Gij vuengguek seizcaeux haenx
(Vuengzciuz Sanhnanz (山南) , Cunghsanh (中山) caeuq Sanhbwz(山北)) hix yungh cwnghauh
neix.

Liuzgiuzgoz youq gyang Daizvanh caeuq Yizbwnj Giujcouh, gaenq laeng Mingzciuz
caeuq Cingciuz ciuzgung. Samozfanh ciemqhaeuj liux de, de goj laeng Samozfanh
ciuzgung. Liuzgiuzgoz aenvih diegyouq daegbied, bienqbaenz aen zunghcenjcan
gaicawx Dunghnanzya caeuq Dungbwzya ndeu, vunz hemq de guh "aen giuz gyoengq
guek".

Liuzgiuzgoz youq gwnz Liuzgiuz Gindauj. Dijgvangq de dwg 3600 bingzfueng
goengleix. Baihsae de dwg Haij Cungguek Doeng, Baihdoeng de dwg Daibingzyangz.
De miz aen dauj ceiq hung ndeu, hemqguh Cunghcinz Bwnjdauj. Gingsingz
Liuzgiuzgoz dwg Singz Soujlij, youq baihndaw vueng caeuq guen banhgoeng. UNESCO
bingzdingh Singz Soujlij guh seiqgyaiq vwnzva yizcanj.



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cungzcoj_Si

Cungzcoj Si (Sawgun: 崇左市) dieg youq baih doengnamz Guengjsae, dwg aen cungsim
cwngci ginghci gyauhdungh Gveiqsaenamz. Cungzcoj lisij gyaeraez, bya dah
gyaeundei, vunz gvai dieg ndei, lumj aen caw ndongqmigmig he seb youq bangx dah
Cojgyangh Namzguek neix. 2003 nienz 8 nyied 6 hauh, Cungzcoj Si Yinzminz Cwngfuj
venj baiz laebbaenz. Daengx si guenj Gyanghcouhgih caeuq Fuzsuih, Ningzmingz,
Lungzcouh, Dasinh, Denhdwngj daengj 5 aen yienh, daih guenj Bingzsiengz Si.
Gungh miz 38 cin 41 yangh, 806 aen hingzcwngcunh. Mienhcik gungh
17,345 bingzfuenggoengleix, ciemq Guengjsae cungj mienhcik 7.33%; yinzgouj gungh
227.36 fanh, comz youq Bouxcuengh, Bouxgun, Yauzcuz, Myauzcuz, Veizcuz, Dungcuz,
Suijcuz, Ginghcuz daengj minzcuz, ndawde yinzgouj Bouxcuengh miz 202.65 fanh,
ciemq cungj yinzgouj 89.13%, dwg Cungguek Bouxcuengh yinzgouj ciemq beijlaeh
ceiq sang aen digizsi he.

Cungzcoj Si dieg youq bien'gyaiq digih, saujsu minzcuz digih caeuq gwzming
laujgih, yiengjsouh guekgya baihsae daih haifat cwngcwz youhvei benhmau cwngzcwz
nem fuz hwnj saujsu minzcuz digih, gwzming laujgih cwngzcwz, vih daengx si
fazcanj bien'gyaiq mauyiz, mbehai doiq baihrog mauyiz caeuq gya vaiq ginghci
gensez yamqdin, daez hawj cwngzcwz baujhoh gengndongj. Miz sim angq coux
baengzyoux guek rog, Gangj Au beixnuengx, rog guek gyauzbauh caeuq ndaw guek gak
giz doengh boux daeuj neix douzswh haifat, caez guh ok saehnieb hungmbwk.



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/BouxCuengh

Bouxcuengh (Sawndip: 佈僮 Vahgun:壮族) dwg aen minzcuzvunznoix Cunghvaz Yinzminz
Gunghozgoz(Cungguek).Bouxcuengh dwg minzcuz vunz lai daih ngeih youq
Cungguek,dwg nga ndeu duh Bakvied ciuhgonq.Neix Bouxcuengh youq Gvangjsae,
Gvangjdoeng, Yinznanz, Guicouh lai.Bouxcuengh caeuq Bouxyaej,Bouxdaej Bouxnoengz
Giáy youq Yiednamz doxlumj,Caez heuh guh Bouxraeuz.

Sawndip dwg cungj saw ndeu bouxmo caeuq bouxciengqfwen gonq caux ok,ragoek
daengz Dangzciuz cien bi gonq.Miz sawloih sawndip gyoepsuenq,sawndip lwgminz
yungh gungh miz 4800 aen yiengh neix.Miz bonj saw duh
Soengqciuz(宋·范成大《桂海虞衡志》)naeuz:"Baihgyae fungsug rwix,raizsaw gauqguen mbawheiq
daengj saeh neix,gag yungh saw doj(Saw doj de naeuz cix dwg Sawjndip),Guiqlinz
gij gunh neix cungj lumj yiengh neix."(边远俗陋，牒诉券的，专用土俗书，桂林诸郡皆然。)

Cunghvaz Yinzminz Gunghozgoz laebbaenz gvaqlaeng,bi 1955 doenggvaq Fueng'an
Sawcuengh,youq dieg Cuengh doiqgvangj sawjyungh.Fueng'an nienzdaih 50 dwg yungh
sawmeh duh Sihlahfuh caeuq sawmeh duh gag guh.Nienzdaih 1980 gvaqlaeng,Sawcuengh
gag yungh 26 aen Sawmeh Lahdinh.



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adolf_Windaus

Adolf Otto Reinhold Windaus（1876 nienz 12 nyied 25 hauh － 1959 nienz 6 nyied 9
hauh, Dwzgoz vaqhaggya. Youq 1895 nienz gauj haeuj Freiburg Daihhag caeuq Berlin
Humboldt Daihhag hag yw, gaenq gaen Emil Fischer doeg vaqhag. Youq 1990 nienz de
guh baenz bozswq. 1901 nienz bae Freiburg yenzgiu gij damjgucwnz. Youq 1928
nienz ndaej Nobel vaqhag ciengj. Adolf Butenandt gaenq hawj de guh lwghag.

阿道夫·温道斯在1876年圣诞节生于柏林，他的父亲是服装制造者阿道夫·温道斯，母亲是玛格丽特·埃尔斯特。他在柏林法语文理学校受了早期教育，那时他喜欢文学。189
5年起进入弗莱堡大学和柏林洪堡大学学习医学，1897年他通过了初级医学测试。在柏林学习时，他听了埃米尔·费歇尔的化学课程。当时费歇尔正从事生物化合物的研究，比如
蛋白质和糖类。

对化学的兴趣促使他在弗莱堡跟随著名化学家海因里希·基利安尼学习这个领域。费歇尔和基里安尼设计了使用氰醇中间体将较小的糖类合称为大分子糖类的方法。基里安尼指导温道
斯开始了对固醇的研究，后来温道斯正是因为对这个领域的贡献而获得诺贝尔奖。温道斯带着对化学的兴趣继续研读医学，受魏斯曼影响，温道斯还副修了动物学。

1900年温道斯获博士学位，论文是关于心脏毒，尤其是来自毛地黄属的化合物。毕业后，温道斯去了柏林，成了埃米尔·费歇尔的助手。在那儿他与奥托·迪尔斯成为了好友。迪
尔斯后来在1950年与阿尔德因对有机合成的贡献分享了诺贝尔化学奖。温道斯和迪尔斯的友谊一直持续到后者1954年逝世。

温道斯与弗朗茨·克诺普合作进行了重要的研究，后者以对脂肪酸降解的研究而知名。二人一道研究了咪唑衍生物，结果发现了组胺激素。由于组胺的重要药用价值，温道斯成为了德
国化学工业的重要人物。

1901年温道斯回弗莱堡开始研究胆固醇，当时人们对它的化学结构还一无所知。从一开始他就意识到甾醇是合成其他一些物质的材料，后来在1903年发表了《论胆固醇》。1
919年他成功将胆固醇转化为胆烷酸（早些时候由他的另一好友、诺贝尔化学奖得主奥托·威兰由胆汁酸中分离），证明了胆汁酸与甾醇密切相关。他还发现，胆固醇可以经几个步
骤后转化为维生素D3。

温道斯1906年被任命为助理教授，1913年成为因斯布鲁克大学应用医学化学教授。1915年他成为哥廷根化学教授，1944年退休，那时他已是普通化学实验室主任了。
他的学生中包括阿道夫·布特南特和汉斯·布罗克曼。

1925年，他应阿尔弗雷德·赫斯的邀请到纽约研究维生素D。他与法本公司合作研究了维生素B1，证明其化学结构中所含的不是咪唑环，而是噻唑环、嘧啶环。温道斯还用实验
研究了氢化环系统顺式和反式连接的立体化学问题。化学疗法是他后期生涯中关注的主要问题。

1928年12月12日，温道斯在获奖演说中叙述了他在固醇领域的研究。他将固醇定义为分布于动物界和植物界，但在细菌中未发现的不含氮大分子醇类。胆固醇最早是从胆结石
中提炼出来的，它是一种不饱和化合物，在整个人体中都存在，分子中包含27个碳原子、46个氢原子、1个氧原子。它在自然界中都有被发现，它的单一醇类，在某种程度上，能
够酯化为不同的脂肪酸。虽然它大量集中在脑部，但在人类血清中发现的含量展现出很大的不同。高含量的胆固醇会富集在肝中并造成损害，温道斯根据那个时代的实验数据相信，胆
固醇含量中等或偏高的饮食与动脉硬化有一定联系。

温道斯与好友威兰的工作通过一种双氢固醇——粪酯醇有了联系。它可以自然产生，但不能通过胆固醇的氢化来合成。在实验室中，温道斯用盐酸初治使胆固醇转化为粪酯醇。以粪酯
醇为初始材料，温道斯用吸收氧化剂的方法将其转化为胆烷酸。一般的胆酸源于胆烷酸。威兰将胆烷酸与固醇联系起来。



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cigemq

Cigemq(Calotes versicolor), lij heuh duzcoengmax、cungqgyaq、banjcoeng, youq
Yindu、Andazman gizdauj、Cunghnanz buendauj、Ahfuhan、Swlijlanzkaj caeuq Cunghgoz
Yinznanz、Guangjgoengj、Guangjsih dengj dieg.

The ground-colour is generally a light brownish olive, but the lizard can change
it to bright red, to black, and to a mixture of both. This change is sometimes
confined to the head, at other times diffused over the whole body and tail. A
common state in which it may be seen (as stated by Mr. Jerdon) is, seated on a
hedge or bush, with the tail and limbs black, head and neck yellow picked out
with red, and the rest of the body red. Jerdon and Blyth agree that these
bright, changeable colours are peculiar to the male during the breeding-season,
which falls in the months of May and June.

Mouhot has collected in Siam one of those fine variations of colours, which,
however, appear to be infinite. It has the usual cross streaks between the eyes
and the radiating lines continent of India to China; it is very common in
Ceylon, not extending into the temperate zone of the Himalayas. Ceylonese
specimens are generally somewhat larger; one of them measured 16 inches, the
tail taking 11 inches. It is found in hedges and trees; it is known in Ceylon
under the name of "Bloodsucker", a designation the origin of which cannot be
satisfactorily traced; in the opinion of Kelaart, the name was given to it from
the occasional reddish hue of the throat and neck. The female lays from five to
sixteen soft oval eggs, about 5/8 of an inch long, in hollows of trees, or in
holes in the soil which they have burrowed, afterward covering them up. The
young appear in about eight or nine weeks. In a hot sunny day a solitary
Bloodsucker may be seen on a twig or on a wall, basking in the sun, with mouth
wide open. After a shower of rain numbers of them arc seen to come down on the
ground and pick up the larva and small insects which fall from the trees during
the showers.



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bou%D1%87Cue%C5%8B%D1%8C

Bouxcuengh (Sawndip: 佈僮 Vahgun:壮族) dwg aen minzcuzvunznoix Cunghvaz Yinzminz
Gunghozgoz(Cungguek).Bouxcuengh dwg minzcuz vunz lai daih ngeih youq
Cungguek,dwg nga ndeu duh Bakvied ciuhgonq.Neix Bouxcuengh youq Gvangjsae,
Gvangjdoeng, Yinznanz, Guicouh lai.Bouxcuengh caeuq Bouxyaej,Bouxdaej Bouxnoengz
Giáy youq Yiednamz doxlumj,Caez heuh guh Bouxraeuz.

Sawndip dwg cungj saw ndeu bouxmo caeuq bouxciengqfwen gonq caux ok,ragoek
daengz Dangzciuz cien bi gonq.Miz sawloih sawndip gyoepsuenq,sawndip lwgminz
yungh gungh miz 4800 aen yiengh neix.Miz bonj saw duh
Soengqciuz(宋·范成大《桂海虞衡志》)naeuz:"Baihgyae fungsug rwix,raizsaw gauqguen mbawheiq
daengj saeh neix,gag yungh saw doj(Saw doj de naeuz cix dwg Sawjndip),Guiqlinz
gij gunh neix cungj lumj yiengh neix."(边远俗陋，牒诉券的，专用土俗书，桂林诸郡皆然。)

Cunghvaz Yinzminz Gunghozgoz laebbaenz gvaqlaeng,bi 1955 doenggvaq Fueng'an
Sawcuengh,youq dieg Cuengh doiqgvangj sawjyungh.Fueng'an nienzdaih 50 dwg yungh
sawmeh duh Sihlahfuh caeuq sawmeh duh gag guh.Nienzdaih 1980 gvaqlaeng,Sawcuengh
gag yungh 26 aen Sawmeh Lahdinh.



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canghcuz

Bouxcuengh (Sawndip: 佈僮 Vahgun:壮族) dwg aen minzcuzvunznoix Cunghvaz Yinzminz
Gunghozgoz(Cungguek).Bouxcuengh dwg minzcuz vunz lai daih ngeih youq
Cungguek,dwg nga ndeu duh Bakvied ciuhgonq.Neix Bouxcuengh youq Gvangjsae,
Gvangjdoeng, Yinznanz, Guicouh lai.Bouxcuengh caeuq Bouxyaej,Bouxdaej Bouxnoengz
Giáy youq Yiednamz doxlumj,Caez heuh guh Bouxraeuz.

Sawndip dwg cungj saw ndeu bouxmo caeuq bouxciengqfwen gonq caux ok,ragoek
daengz Dangzciuz cien bi gonq.Miz sawloih sawndip gyoepsuenq,sawndip lwgminz
yungh gungh miz 4800 aen yiengh neix.Miz bonj saw duh
Soengqciuz(宋·范成大《桂海虞衡志》)naeuz:"Baihgyae fungsug rwix,raizsaw gauqguen mbawheiq
daengj saeh neix,gag yungh saw doj(Saw doj de naeuz cix dwg Sawjndip),Guiqlinz
gij gunh neix cungj lumj yiengh neix."(边远俗陋，牒诉券的，专用土俗书，桂林诸郡皆然。)

Cunghvaz Yinzminz Gunghozgoz laebbaenz gvaqlaeng,bi 1955 doenggvaq Fueng'an
Sawcuengh,youq dieg Cuengh doiqgvangj sawjyungh.Fueng'an nienzdaih 50 dwg yungh
sawmeh duh Sihlahfuh caeuq sawmeh duh gag guh.Nienzdaih 1980 gvaqlaeng,Sawcuengh
gag yungh 26 aen Sawmeh Lahdinh.



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cangyoz

Cuenghhag (Cang’yoz ; Sawgun: 壮学; Bingqyaem: Zhuàngxué) dwg monz yozgoh aeu
Bouxcuengh daeuj guh yenhgiu duisieng he. De dawz Bouxcuengh aen minzcuz neix
guhbaenz aen cingjdij ndeu daeuj gaujcaz, yenhgiu Bouxcuengh gij lizsij caeuq
vwnzva gijyenz、bencenh、fazcanj gocwngz de, yenhgiu Bouxcuengh youq fazcanj
gyaeraez ndawde caemdingh gij vuzciz vwnzva、cingsaenz vwnzva caeuq cidu vwnzva
gij nei’hanz、dwzcwngh、gunghnwngz caeuq fazcanj gveihliz de,yenhgiu Bouxcuengh
sevei、cunghgyau、ginghci、gyauyuz、sinhlij、swnghdai、gohgi doengh gij fuengfueng
mienhmienh neix. De dwg Yinzvwnz sevei gohyoz ndawde monz yozgoh doglaeb he,miz
gij daegdiemj cunghhozsing caeuq gyauhcahsing de.

Cuenghhag gij yenhgiu neiyungz de gvangq dangqmaz, sezgiz daengz Bouxcuengh gij
lizsij、yijyenz、cunghgyau、vwnzva、ginghci、vwnzyoz、yisuz、gyauyuz、cezyoz、minzsuz、sin
hlij、yihyoz、gohgi、sevei sujsiz、sevei bencenh caeuq diegcuengh yendaiva gocwngz
ndawde daez okdaeuj gij lijlun vwndiz caeuq sizcenj vwndiz de, gij yenhgiu
fanveiz de hamjgvaq yinzvwnz gohyoz、sevei gohyoz caeuq mbangj swyenz gohyoz
lingjyiz, goj naeuz Cuenghhag bauhamz liux Bouxcuengh sevei gij swnghcanjliz
caeuq swnghcanj gvanhhi、ginghci gihcuj caeuq baihgwnz gencuz sojmiz neiyungz.
Neix baez ding’yi le gangjmingz, Cuenghhag cix dwg gvendaengz gij yozvwn
Bouxcuengh caeuq gij cihsiz dijyi gag doglaeb de, caemh eiqhoz naeuz Cuenghhag
bauhamz miz song daih yenhgiu cujdiz, it dwg gvendaengz Bouxcuengh gij lizsij
caeuq vwnzva yenhgiu; ngeih dwg Bouxcuengh yendaiva yenhgiu. Duenh seizneix
Cuenghhag yenhgiu lij aeu gij baihnaj guhcawj, dinglai yawjnaek Bouxcuengh gij
lizsij、vuzciz vwnzva caeuq cingsaenz vwnzva yenhgiu.

Cuenghhag guh monz yozgoh gohyoz he, dinglai vunz nyinhnaeuz dwg daj ngeihcib
si’gij 50 nienzdaih heijdaeuz. Bouxcuengh boux daih’it lizsij yozgyah caeuq
minzcuz yozgyah Vangz Yenfanh gyausou youq 50 nienzdaih guhdaeuz guh ndaej
haujlai gij gvangjsih saujsu minzcuz lizsij diucaz caeuq yenhgiu cingzgoj de,
hawj Cuenghhag ndaej hwngvuengh laebdingh liux gij gohyoz dijyi giekdaej
maenhsaed de, gijneix gaenq bouxboux cungj naeuz dwg lo. Vangz Yenbanh gyausou
deng vunzlai naeuz dwg cungjsae Cuenghhag le, yienghneix gij lwgsae de Vangz
Swnghging、Cangh Yizminz、Veiz Gingvwnj、Suz Gvancangh、Siuh Swzcangh、Vangz
Veijcingz、Liz Gozcuz、Lij Ganfwnh、Couh Cunghhenz、Yi Cizgaih、Hoz Lungzginz、Gungh
Yungjveih doengh boux gyausou roxnaeuz yenhgiuyenz neix,cungj baenz Cuenghhag
daih’it、ngeih、sam daih daibyauj yozcej de caez.



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bou%D1%87cue%C5%8B%D1%8C

Bouxcuengh (Sawndip: 佈僮 Vahgun:壮族) dwg aen minzcuzvunznoix Cunghvaz Yinzminz
Gunghozgoz(Cungguek).Bouxcuengh dwg minzcuz vunz lai daih ngeih youq
Cungguek,dwg nga ndeu duh Bakvied ciuhgonq.Neix Bouxcuengh youq Gvangjsae,
Gvangjdoeng, Yinznanz, Guicouh lai.Bouxcuengh caeuq Bouxyaej,Bouxdaej Bouxnoengz
Giáy youq Yiednamz doxlumj,Caez heuh guh Bouxraeuz.

Sawndip dwg cungj saw ndeu bouxmo caeuq bouxciengqfwen gonq caux ok,ragoek
daengz Dangzciuz cien bi gonq.Miz sawloih sawndip gyoepsuenq,sawndip lwgminz
yungh gungh miz 4800 aen yiengh neix.Miz bonj saw duh
Soengqciuz(宋·范成大《桂海虞衡志》)naeuz:"Baihgyae fungsug rwix,raizsaw gauqguen mbawheiq
daengj saeh neix,gag yungh saw doj(Saw doj de naeuz cix dwg Sawjndip),Guiqlinz
gij gunh neix cungj lumj yiengh neix."(边远俗陋，牒诉券的，专用土俗书，桂林诸郡皆然。)

Cunghvaz Yinzminz Gunghozgoz laebbaenz gvaqlaeng,bi 1955 doenggvaq Fueng'an
Sawcuengh,youq dieg Cuengh doiqgvangj sawjyungh.Fueng'an nienzdaih 50 dwg yungh
sawmeh duh Sihlahfuh caeuq sawmeh duh gag guh.Nienzdaih 1980 gvaqlaeng,Sawcuengh
gag yungh 26 aen Sawmeh Lahdinh.



https://za.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bou%D1%87Cue%C5%8B%C6%85

Bouxcuengh (Sawndip: 佈僮 Vahgun:壮族) dwg aen minzcuzvunznoix Cunghvaz Yinzminz
Gunghozgoz(Cungguek).Bouxcuengh dwg minzcuz vunz lai daih ngeih youq
Cungguek,dwg nga ndeu duh Bakvied ciuhgonq.Neix Bouxcuengh youq Gvangjsae,
Gvangjdoeng, Yinznanz, Guicouh lai.Bouxcuengh caeuq Bouxyaej,Bouxdaej Bouxnoengz
Giáy youq Yiednamz doxlumj,Caez heuh guh Bouxraeuz.

Sawndip dwg cungj saw ndeu bouxmo caeuq bouxciengqfwen gonq caux ok,ragoek
daengz Dangzciuz cien bi gonq.Miz sawloih sawndip gyoepsuenq,sawndip lwgminz
yungh gungh miz 4800 aen yiengh neix.Miz bonj saw duh
Soengqciuz(宋·范成大《桂海虞衡志》)naeuz:"Baihgyae fungsug rwix,raizsaw gauqguen mbawheiq
daengj saeh neix,gag yungh saw doj(Saw doj de naeuz cix dwg Sawjndip),Guiqlinz
gij gunh neix cungj lumj yiengh neix."(边远俗陋，牒诉券的，专用土俗书，桂林诸郡皆然。)

Cunghvaz Yinzminz Gunghozgoz laebbaenz gvaqlaeng,bi 1955 doenggvaq Fueng'an
Sawcuengh,youq dieg Cuengh doiqgvangj sawjyungh.Fueng'an nienzdaih 50 dwg yungh
sawmeh duh Sihlahfuh caeuq sawmeh duh gag guh.Nienzdaih 1980 gvaqlaeng,Sawcuengh
gag yungh 26 aen Sawmeh Lahdinh.



