https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/One-Punch_Man

One-Punch Man (Japanese: ワンパンマン, Hepburn: Wanpanman?) is an ongoing Japanese
superhero parody webcomic created by an author using the pseudonym One which
began publication in early 2009. The series quickly went viral, surpassing 7.9
million hits in June 2012. The Japanese shortened name Wanpanman is a play on
the long-running children's character Anpanman, wanpan being a contraction of
wanpanchi ("one punch"). One-Punch Man tells the story of Saitama, an extremely
overpowered superhero, who has grown bored by the absence of challenge in his
fight against evil and seeks to find a worthy opponent.

A digital manga remake of the series, illustrated by Yusuke Murata, began
publication on Shueisha's Young Jump Web Comics website in 2012. The chapters
are periodically collected and printed into tankōbon volumes, with twelve
released as of December 2, 2016. Viz Media has licensed the remake for English
serialization in its Weekly Shonen Jump digital magazine.

A television anime adaptation by Madhouse aired in Japan between October and
December 2015.It was dubbed in English during the summer of 2016. A second
season is currently in the works.

On an Earth-like super-continent planet, strange monsters have been mysteriously
appearing and causing disasters resulting in the world's superheroes rising to
combat them alongside the local supervillains. Saitama, the protagonist of the
series, is the strongest hero alive in the entire franchise, hailing from the
metropolis of City Z who easily defeats the monsters or other villains with a
single punch to the point where monsters just explode when struck. However, due
to his limitless strength, Saitama has become bored with his power and is
constantly trying to find stronger opponents who can present a challenge to him.

As Saitama is active as a hero, he meets various other heroes and villains. He
gets a disciple in the form of the cyborg Genos and consequently joins the Hero
Association in order to gain official recognition. Despite defeating many strong
monsters that even the Heroes Association’s top members are unable to defeat,
Saitama struggles to gain respect. Also, he never takes the credit for defeating
a monster, which instead falls on King, who was promoted to an S-class hero.
Most people look down on him due to his plain physical appearance and some
accuse him of being a counterfeit hero. Only a small number of individuals in
the series recognize his talent and humility towards others, although this later
changes when the whole of the Hero Association witness Saitama's true strength.

One began publishing One-Punch Man as a webcomic in 2009. As of February
2017[update], the webcomic has released 114 chapters. When the series became
popular, receiving 7.9 million hits by June 2012, Yusuke Murata contacted One
with a proposal to redraw the comic for digital publication in Weekly Young
Jump's spin-off manga website Young Jump Web Comics (となりのヤングジャンプ, Tonari no
Yangu Janpu?), published by Shueisha. The first chapter was published on June
14, 2012. The chapters are periodically collected and printed into tankōbon
volumes, with twelve released as of December 2, 2016. A drama CD was bundled
with the ninth volume, which was released in August 2015.

The series began publication in Viz Media's Weekly Shonen Jump (Shonen Jump
Alpha at the time) in North America on January 21, 2013. The first digital
volume was released in February 2014. One-Punch Man was one of a number of
series that Viz made available on ComiXology in June 2014. The manga was
released in print in the United States starting in September 2015.

An anime adaptation was announced in the 15th issue of Weekly Young Jump on
March 10, 2015. The series' first season was directed by Shingo Natsume at
Madhouse and written by Tomohiro Suzuki. The series also features character
designs by Chikashi Kubota, who also serves as chief animation director, music
by Makoto Miyazaki and art design by Shigemi Ikeda and Yukiko Maruyama. Ken
Hashimoto serves as the series color key artist, Akane Fushihara is the director
of photography and Kashiko Kimura serves as the series editor, and Shoji Hata
does sound design. The opening theme song is "The Hero!! ~Ikareru Ken ni Honō o
Tsukero~" (THE HERO!! ～怒れる拳に火をつけろ～, "The Hero!! Set Fire to the Furious Fist")
by JAM Project, and the closing theme is "Hoshi Yori Saki ni Mitsukete Ageru"
(星より先に見つけてあげる, "I'll Find It Before the Stars for You") by Hiroko Moriguchi.

One-Punch Man's first season aired in Japan between October 5, 2015 and December
21, 2015 on TV Tokyo, airing at later dates on TVO, TVQ, KBS, BS Japan, and
AT-X, and ran for 12 episodes. The season streamed on Niconico and was simulcast
on Hulu, Daisuki, and Viz Media's Neon Alley service. A preview screening was
held in the Saitama City Cultural Center on September 6, 2015. The series is
licensed by Viz Media in North America, and by Kaze UK in the United Kingdom. An
original video animation was released with the tenth manga volume on December 4,
2015. Additional OVA episodes are included with Blu-ray Disc & DVD volumes of
the season, the first of which was released on December 24, 2015. A second
season has been announced. Murata announced in the last weeks of the first
season's airing schedule that he was working on making a second season a
reality, but had not confirmed it was in development as of December
2015[update]. It has been confirmed since then to be released in 2017, but the
exact date is unknown. It's been speculated to be somewhere around the middle of
2017. Viz Media announced that they were working on an English-language dub of
One-Punch Man at Anime Boston 2016. On July 1, It was announced during Toonami's
Anime Expo panel that the series will begin airing on July 16, 2016.

One-Punch Man had 2.2 million copies in print in November 2013, 3.2 million
copies in April 2014, and 4.5 million copies in November 2014. By November 2016,
this numbered had grown to 11.1 million copies in print. The series was one of
ten nominated for the seventh annual Manga Taishō Awards in 2014.

Once released in the United States, both the first and second volumes debuted on
the New York Times Manga Best Sellers list, at first and second place,
respectively, and stayed there for two weeks. Volume one dropped to second place
for the third week, while volume two fell off the list altogether. Volume one
was still on the list for a fourth week.[needs update] The series was nominated
for an Eisner Award in 2015.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jon_Snow_(character)

Jon Snow is a fictional character in the A Song of Ice and Fire series of
fantasy novels by American author George R. R. Martin, and its television
adaptation Game of Thrones. He is a prominent point of view character in the
novels, and has been called one of the author's "finest creations" and most
popular characters by The New York Times. Jon is a main character in the TV
series, and his storyline in the 2015 season 5 finale generated a strong
reaction among viewers. Speculation about the character's parentage has also
been a popular topic of discussion among fans of both the books and the TV
series.

Jon is introduced in 1996's A Game of Thrones as the illegitimate son of Ned
Stark, the honorable lord of Winterfell, an ancient fortress in the North of the
fictional kingdom of Westeros. Knowing his prospects are limited by his status,
Jon joins the Night's Watch, who guard the far northern borders from the
wildlings who live beyond The Wall. As the rest of the Starks face grave
adversity, Jon finds himself honor bound to remain with the Watch. In A Clash of
Kings (1998), he joins a scouting party investigating the growing threat from
the otherworldly "Others" beyond the Wall, and manages to infiltrate the
wildlings. Jon learns of their plans to invade Westeros in A Storm of Swords
(2000), and begins to fall in love with the fierce wildling woman Ygritte. He
betrays them—and Ygritte—before they can attack, but the Night Watch's victory
comes at a heavy price for Jon. Now the Lord Commander of the Watch, he appears
briefly in 2005's A Feast for Crows. Jon returns as a prominent character in a A
Dance with Dragons (2011), working to negotiate an alliance between the Night's
Watch and the wildlings. The growing animosity he has attracted from among the
Watch finally catches up with him, and he is forced to face the dire
consequences.

Jon is portrayed by Kit Harington on the HBO series Game of Thrones. His
storyline follows the character's plot arc from the novel series, though season
6 of the TV adaptation continued on from the events of Martin's latest published
installment. Harington was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding
Supporting Actor in a Drama Series for the role in 2016. He was also nominated
for a Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor on Television in 2012 and 2016. He
and the rest of the cast were nominated for Screen Actors Guild Awards for
Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series in 2012, 2014, 2015 and
2016.

In A Game of Thrones, Jon Snow is introduced as the 14-year-old bastard son of
Eddard "Ned" Stark, Lord of Winterfell, and half-brother to Robb, Sansa, Arya,
Bran and Rickon. Jon is described as having strong Stark features with a lean
build, long face, dark brown hair and grey eyes. Jon has the surname "Snow"
(customarily used for illegitimate children in the North) and is resented by
Ned's wife Catelyn, who views him as a constant reminder of Ned's infidelity.
Jon is the same age as Robb and enjoys a warm relationship with his siblings,
particularly the tomboy Arya (who resembles Jon and like him does not feel like
she fits in). Ned treats Jon as much like his other children as propriety and
his honor will allow. Still, as somewhat of an outsider, Jon has learned to be
independent and to fend for himself when necessary. Jon idolizes his father, but
is wounded by Ned's refusal to tell him about his mother. At the beginning of
the story, Jon adopts the albino direwolf that he names Ghost. He later finds
that at times he can "inhabit" the wolf and share its experiences.

David Orr of The New York Times describes Jon as "a complex, thoughtful and
basically good character". David Benioff and D. B. Weiss, the creators and
executive producers of the television adaptation of the series, explain that Jon
is one of several characters in the series who must "face hard truths about the
world they live in, and adapt themselves to those truths" because "The struggle
many of them face is how to do that without losing their grip on who they are."
Ned Stark teaches all his children about leadership, selflessness, duty and
honor. Following his father's example becomes more difficult as Jon faces
challenges to his identity as a man, a Stark, and a brother of the Night's
Watch. Benioff and Weiss note that "Jon Snow tries to live with honor, while
knowing that honor often gets his family members murdered." Writing for Variety
about the season 6 episode "Battle of the Bastards", Laura Prudom suggests that
Jon "has the same shortcomings" as his father: "he fights with honor against
opponents who are all too willing to use that predictable morality against him".

Jon is a prominent point of view character in the novels, and has been called
one of Martin's "finest creations". Jon is introduced as the illegitimate son of
a Northern lord who, realizing he is an outsider in his own family, follows his
uncle to the far north and accepts the honorable duty of serving in the Night's
Watch. But as much as he is a second-class Stark at home, initially his fellow
recruits and brothers of the Watch set him apart as privileged and aloof. Jon
adapts, soon proving himself to be wise, compassionate, and a natural leader.
Over the course of the series, Jon's loyalty to the Watch and its vows, his
family, and even Westeros itself are tested as he becomes embroiled in the
efforts of the wildlings from Beyond the Wall to force their way back into the
Seven Kingdoms. He lives among them as a spy for the Watch, sympathetic to their
cause and becoming romantically involved with the tenacious Ygritte. However he
ultimately betrays them to defend The Wall. Later, as the newest Lord Commander
of the Night's Watch, he pursues an alliance with the wildlings.

Several reviews of 2011's A Dance with Dragons noted the return to the narrative
of Jon, Daenerys Targaryen and Tyrion Lannister, the three popular characters
whom fans had missed most from the previous volume, A Feast for Crows. These
"favorites" had last been featured 11 years before in Martin's A Storm of
Swords. In A Dance with Dragons, Jon's leadership of the Night's Watch is
complicated by several unprecedented challenges, including a wildling alliance,
the demands of would-be-king Stannis Baratheon and the conflicting factions
developing within the Watch itself. The New York Times notes that "Jon’s
leadership is the best hope of Westeros, so naturally he’s in imminent danger
throughout A Dance With Dragons." James Hibberd of Entertainment Weekly called
Jon's final chapter in A Dance with Dragons "a harsh chapter in terms of fan
expectations. You go from this total high of Jon giving this rousing speech
about going after the evil Ramsay Bolton, to this utter low of his men turning
against him." Jon's presence in the forthcoming volume The Winds of Winter is
uncertain.

The identity of Jon's mother has created much speculation among readers of the
series, and guessing her identity was the test Martin gave Benioff and Weiss
when they approached him in March 2006 about adapting his novels into a TV
series. In the novels, Martin hints that she could be a servant named Wylla, or
the noblewoman Ashara Dayne. The popular fan theory—called "R+L=J", an
abbreviation of "Rhaegar + Lyanna = Jon"—proposes that Jon is not the son of Ned
at all, but is actually the son of Rhaegar Targaryen and Ned's younger sister
Lyanna Stark.

Though the character is presented as the illegitimate son of Ned Stark, David
Orr voiced the doubt of some readers when he wrote in The New York Times in
2011, "Jon Snow is presented as the illegitimate son of the Stark patriarch,
although it's uncertain whether Stark is indeed his father." Actor Sean Bean,
who portrays Ned on the HBO television series, said when asked in a 2014
interview about returning to the series to appear in flashbacks, "I've
definitely got some unfinished business that needs to be resolved there. I'm
obviously not Jon Snow's dad. And you need that to be revealed at some point,
don't you?" The uncertainty arises from anecdotal evidence in the texts
interpreted by readers to connect the mysterious maternity of Ned's son with the
vague backstory of his sister Lyanna.

As recounted by Ned in A Game of Thrones, at a tourney years before the events
of the novel, Rhaegar had shown public favor to Lyanna in the presence of his
own wife, the Dornish princess Elia Martell. When Rhaegar and Lyanna disappeared
sometime later, her father Rickard and eldest brother Brandon confronted
Rhaegar's father, the Mad King Aerys Targaryen, demanding that his son return
the abducted Lyanna. Aerys had Rickard and Brandon put to death for their
insolence, inciting Ned and his friend Robert Baratheon, Lord of Storm's End and
Lyanna's betrothed, to rebel against Aerys. In what later became known as
Robert's Rebellion, Aerys was overthrown and Rhaegar was killed by Robert in
single combat. After a bloody battle against three of Aerys' Kingsguard
protecting the Tower of Joy in Dorne, Ned found Lyanna inside, in a "bed of
blood." She died shortly after eliciting a promise from Ned. Once the war was
won, he returned to Winterfell with his illegitimate son Jon.

The R+L=J theory posits that rather than Rhaegar kidnapping Lyanna, they fell in
love and ran away together. Living for a year in the Tower of Joy, they
conceived a child—Jon. Rhaegar was killed in battle by Robert, and Lyanna died
in childbirth. Ned claimed the baby as his own to protect him from Robert, who
sought to exterminate all Targaryens out of hatred and to secure his claim to
the throne.

HBO's Game of Thrones has included in its adaptation many of the "hints"
identified by this theory. In the season 6 finale, "The Winds of Winter", Bran
Stark has a vision of the past which shows Ned reuniting with a dying Lyanna in
the Tower of Joy. Lyanna makes him promise to protect her son—Jon. An
infographic subsequently posted on the HBO-controlled website
MakingGameofThrones.com confirmed Rhaegar as Jon's father.

Jon Snow is first introduced in A Game of Thrones (1996), as he and his five
siblings adopt six orphaned direwolf cubs. As Ned Stark's illegitimate son and
with Ned's wife Catelyn despising him, Jon has always felt removed from the rest
of the Stark family. He resolves to join the Night's Watch, as his status as a
bastard prevents him from holding lands or marrying into a good family. At The
Wall, the other recruits resent Jon's aura of superiority, but he makes amends
by helping them master swordplay. He also befriends Samwell Tarly, a cowardly
lordling who, despite being helpless with weapons, displays an aptitude for book
learning. Jon's independence and his compassion for the recruits invite the ire
of the harsh master-at-arms Alliser Thorne, who sees Jon as a threat to his
authority. Jon gains the notice of the Lord Commander, Jeor Mormont, who names
Jon his personal squire and grooms Jon for command. After learning of his
father's execution, Jon resolves to desert the Night's Watch and join his half
brother Robb, but the other recruits convince Jon to remain loyal to his Night's
Watch vows. The next night, Jon saves Mormont's life by killing an undead wight.
Mormont then orders a Great Ranging beyond the Wall to learn more of this new
threat.

In 1998's A Clash of Kings, Mormont leads a party of Night's Watch rangers
beyond the Wall to investigate the disappearance of Jon's uncle Benjen, assess
the intentions of the wildling leader Mance Rayder and learn more of the threat
posed by the Others. Jon is sent out with a scouting party led by Qhorin
Halfhand. On the journey, Jon comes upon a wildling lookout and takes the
warrior girl Ygritte captive; though told to kill her, Jon lets her escape. Jon
and Qhorin are subsequently captured by the wildlings. Qhorin, who faces certain
execution at Mance's hands, commands Jon to infiltrate the wildlings and learn
their plans, at any cost. Jon pretends to disavow the Night's Watch, and the
wildlings force him to fight Qhorin to the death to earn their trust. With
Qhorin's silent consent, Jon kills him with the aid of Ghost.

As A Storm of Swords (2000) begins, Jon has gained the trust of the wildlings by
killing Qhorin, and marches with their host. He learns that Mance intends to
breach the Wall and march south to escape the Others, crushing the Night's Watch
if necessary. Jon finds himself torn between his growing love for Ygritte and
his vows of celibacy. After climbing over The Wall with Ygritte and Tormund
Giantsbane, Jon deserts them to warn the Watch of the impending attack. He helps
defend Castle Black against the wildlings' initial attacks despite his lack of
men and weapons. Ygritte is killed in the fighting, leaving Jon stricken. When
the battle is won, Jon is arrested for desertion by Thorne and Janos Slynt, but
is freed after convincing the judges of his loyalty. Still suspicious, Thorne
orders that Jon be sent to kill Mance under the pretense of parley, but Jon's
task is interrupted by the arrival of Stannis Baratheon's army. Stannis offers
to legitimize Jon and declare him Lord of Winterfell if he will align the North
with Stannis. Though greatly tempted at the prospect of becoming a true Stark,
Jon again chooses to remain loyal to his Night's Watch vows. With Sam's help,
Jon is elected to the position of Lord Commander by acclamation.

In 2005's A Feast for Crows, Jon sends Sam away from Castle Black with the
Watch's Maester Aemon and Mance's newborn son to protect them from sacrifice by
the Red Priestess Melisandre. He also gives Sam the specific mission of
traveling to the Citadel in Oldtown to become a maester, so that he may better
understand the threat of the White Walkers and eventually succeed Maester Aemon.

In A Dance with Dragons (2011), after sending Sam away to the Citadel to become
a Maester, Jon successfully negotiates the peaceful surrender of the remains of
Mance's army. He promises to settle the wildlings in sparsely populated regions
of the North, and allows some of them to join the Watch to garrison the many
abandoned Night's Watch fortresses. Many members of the Watch dislike the idea
of allowing their ancient enemies through the Wall and welcoming them into their
ranks. Jon attempts to juggle the integration of the wildlings, growing unrest
within the Night's Watch, and Stannis' attempts to use the Watch in his war for
the Iron Throne, while trying to maintain the Watch's strict political
neutrality. Already agitated by these unprecedented developments, a group of
officers led by Slynt openly defies Jon's orders. When Slynt refuses to submit,
Jon executes the man himself. Stannis explains to Jon his plan to attack the
Dreadfort, but Jon advises him to instead rally the Mountain Clans and attack
Deepwood Motte, the fortress of House Glover recently captured by the Ironborn.
Stannis does so, winning the support of the Glovers and the Mormonts. Jon learns
that his sister Arya is being married to Ramsay Bolton so that the Boltons may
claim Winterfell. Unaware that the bride is actually Jeyne Poole, Jon sends
Mance to rescue her while Stannis marches on Winterfell. Jon later receives a
letter from Ramsay claiming that Stannis has been defeated and Mance is a
prisoner. Ramsay demands hostages, else he will march on the Wall and kill Jon.
Jon decides to seek out and kill Ramsay himself, but he is stabbed by his
Night's Watch brothers seeking to uphold the Watch's neutrality before he can
leave Castle Black.

Jon's presence in the forthcoming volume The Winds of Winter is uncertain; when
asked in 2011 by Entertainment Weekly "Why did you kill Jon Snow?", author
Martin responded "Oh, you think he’s dead, do you?" Asked later whether Jon was
killed or will survive, Martin responded with a laugh, "I will not comment on
that."

Martin told Rolling Stone in 2014 that some early inquiries he received about
adapting A Song of Ice and Fire suggested identifying the story's "important
character" and focusing on that individual plot line: Jon and Daenerys Targaryen
being the two most popular choices. Martin was not interested in sacrificing so
much of the overall story. When the pilot for the HBO adaptation went into
production years later, one of the first parts cast was Jon, with Kit Harington
announced in the role in July 2009. Iwan Rheon had also auditioned for the role,
and was brought into the show in season 3 to play Ramsay Snow instead. In
October 2014, Harington and several other key cast members, all contracted for
six seasons of the series, renegotiated their deals to include a potential
seventh season and salary increases for seasons five, six, and seven. The
Hollywood Reporter called the raises "huge", noting that the deal would make the
performers "among the highest-paid actors on cable TV". Deadline.com put the
number for season five at "close to $300,000 an episode" for each actor, and The
Hollywood Reporter wrote in June 2016 that the performers would each be paid
"upward of $500,000 per episode" for seasons seven and the potential eight. In
2017, Harington became one of the highest paid actor on television and will earn
US$1.1 million per episode for the show.

As the series premiered, TV Guide called Harington a "soulful heartthrob" whose
Jon is idolized by his younger siblings and who "seeks purpose" by joining the
Night's Watch. Creators David Benioff and D. B. Weiss later noted that Jon
"tries to live with honor, while knowing that honor often gets his family
members murdered". They explained that he is one of several characters in the
series who must "face hard truths about the world they live in, and adapt
themselves to those truths. The struggle many of them face is how to do that
without losing their grip on who they are." Matt Fowler of IGN wrote in 2013
that while Jon and Daenerys' storylines in season 1 and season 2 "felt very
separate" from the rest of the series' plot, for the first time in season 3,
"Jon's entire situation felt incorporated into the larger picture." Fowler also
added that Jon's "oath-breaking romance with Ygritte added a lot of heat to the
story". In May 2015, International Business Times called Jon "clearly the most
popular character" of the series.

In a 2015 interview Benioff said, "The problem with Jon is, he’s not a cautious
man. It's the problem with him, and also the reason we love him. He is a hero,
but heroes are inherently incautious." Weiss added, "At the end of the day, Jon
is his father’s son, he’s a person who’s honorable to a fault and does the right
thing even when the right thing is extremely dangerous to him personally." In
the June 2015 season 5 finale "Mother's Mercy", Jon is stabbed to death by
Alliser Thorne and several men of the Night's Watch after being labeled a
traitor. With Martin's 2011 novel A Dance with Dragons vague on Jon's fate,
Harington confirmed the character's death in an interview with Entertainment
Weekly, saying "I’ve been told I’m dead. I’m dead. I’m not coming back next
season." He added, "I loved how they brought Olly in to be the person who kills
me. I love how the storyline with Thorne was wrapped up." Benioff also said of
the episode:

Writing for The New York Times, Jeremy Egner called Jon's demise "the biggest
death on the show" since Ned Stark's beheading in season 1. Amid strong fan
reaction over Jon's death on social media, immediately following the episode
journalists began theorizing how the show could resurrect the character. Nate
Jones of Vulture.com noted:

A July 2015 sighting of Harington arriving in Belfast, a primary filming
location for the series where other actors were arriving for season 6 script
read-throughs, prompted further speculation about the character's return.
However, a story in Vanity Fair pointed out that Charles Dance had been seen in
Belfast the previous year after his character Tywin Lannister's death as well,
and he only appeared in the first episode of the subsequent season as a corpse.
Another photo that showed Harington on set in Belfast in a costume that varied
from the Night's Watch outfit was published on September 25, 2015. A season 6
Game of Thrones promotional poster released in November 2015 featured a bloodied
Jon.

Jon is resurrected by Melisandre in "Home", the May 2016 second episode of
season 6. Though calling it a "predictable move" for a television series, David
Sims of The Atlantic praised the plot development as "the right choice" for the
show's narrative. In a subsequent interview with Entertainment Weekly, Harington
said:

Joanna Robinson of Vanity Fair credited Jon's much-discussed cliffhanger death
as a primary factor behind Game of Thrones' subsequent 25% ratings increase for
season 6. Harington's performance in season 6 earned the actor his first
Primetime Emmy Award nomination in July 2016.

Following the plot of A Game of Thrones, in season 1 Jon is the bastard son of
Ned Stark who joins the Night's Watch. He arrives at the Wall, with his direwolf
Ghost in tow, to find that the order is a shadow of its former self. Raised to
be a talented fighter with a strong sense of justice and honor, Jon is at first
contemptuous of his fellow recruits, who are mostly lowborn, untrained criminals
and exiles. In "Lord Snow", he is persuaded by Tyrion Lannister to put aside his
prejudices, and helps some of the others with their weapons training. Jon
befriends Samwell Tarly, who is more an intellectual than a fighter. Jon takes
his vows but is disappointed to be made steward to Lord Commander Jeor Mormont
rather than a ranger in "You Win or You Die". Sam points out that he is likely
being groomed for command. Jon saves Mormont from a wight in "The Pointy End",
and in "Baelor" is given Longclaw, the ancestral blade of House Mormont, in
thanks. Jon learns of his father's execution for treason in "Fire and Blood",
and though tempted to leave the Wall to help his family, his sense of duty
ultimately compels him to stay.

In season 2, Jon witnesses the wildling Craster, a man with many wives who
marries his own daughters, sacrifice his newborn son to the White Walkers in
"The Night Lands". Later, as part of a small scouting party led by Night's Watch
ranger Qhorin Halfhand, Jon is tasked to kill a wildling prisoner, the woman
warrior Ygritte. He finds himself unable to do so in "The Old Gods and the New",
and she escapes, only to capture him with her comrades in "The Prince of
Winterfell". Qhorin orders Jon to pretend to defect and join the wildlings to
discover their plans. In "Valar Morghulis", Qhorin stages a fight and secretly
instructs Jon to kill him to gain the wildlings' trust. Jon does, and is taken
to meet Mance Rayder, the wildlings' King-Beyond-the Wall.

In season 3, Jon pledges his loyalty to Mance and travels with the wildlings,
learning that they intend to scale the Wall and force their way back into
Westeros. Jon's feelings for Ygritte begin to intensify, and they have sex in
"Kissed by Fire". When Jon refuses to kill an innocent man to prove his loyalty
in "The Rains of Castamere", he is attacked by the other wildlings, but escapes.
In "Mhysa", he is tracked by Ygritte, who shoots him with three arrows before he
is able to escape again and return to Castle Black.

In "Two Swords", Alliser Thorne and Janos Slynt call for Jon's execution for
defecting to the wildlings, but Maester Aemon is convinced of Jon's loyalty to
the Watch and sets him free. In "First of His Name", Jon leads an expedition to
Craster's Keep, where some men of the Watch have mutinied and murdered Lord
Commander Mormont. After defeating the mutineers, Jon is reunited with Ghost.
Tormund's wildlings attack Castle Black while Mance's army besieges the Wall in
"The Watchers on the Wall". The wildlings are successfully repelled, though
Ygritte is shot and dies in Jon's arms. Before Jon can negotiate with or kill
Mance, Stannis Baratheon's army arrives and routs the wildling camp, taking
Mance prisoner in the season finale "The Children".

In "The Wars to Come", Stannis enlists Jon as an intermediary between himself
and Mance, hoping to add the wildling army to his own. Mance refuses to submit
to Stannis, and the wildling king is burned at the stake by the red priestess
Melisandre. In "The House of Black and White", Stannis offers to legitimize Jon
and make him lord of Winterfell in exchange for his support. Jon is voted the
new Lord Commander of the Night's Watch, initially tying with his nemesis Thorne
but having the tie settled by Maester Aemon. Jon's intent to welcome the
wildlings into Westeros and grant them lands by the Wall further enrages the
faction of the Watch led by Thorne, who hold a deep seated hatred for the
wildlings. In "Hardhome", Jon travels north of the Wall to the eponymous
wildling village, seeking wildling support for his plan to ally the Night's
Watch and the wildlings against the growing threat of the White Walkers. A
massive force of wights, led by White Walkers and their Night King, attacks the
village, and Jon barely escapes alive with a small group of Night's Watchmen and
wildlings. Shortly after returning to Castle Black in the season finale
"Mother's Mercy", Jon is summoned to hear news of his missing uncle Benjen, but
is instead stabbed to death by Thorne and his group of mutineers.

In "The Red Woman", Davos, Dolorous Edd, and other brothers of the Watch loyal
to Jon barricade themselves in a room with Ghost and Jon's body, and an attack
by Thorne and his men is thwarted by the arrival of Tormund and his wildlings.
Davos encourages Melisandre to attempt to resurrect Jon in "Home", and though
the ritual at first seems to fail, Jon suddenly awakens. After hanging Thorne,
Olly, Bowen Marsh, and Othell Yarwyck for their treason in "Oathbreaker", Jon
gives command of the Watch to Edd and prepares to leave Castle Black. In "Book
of the Stranger", he is reunited with his half-sister Sansa Stark, who has fled
her abusive husband Ramsay Bolton and now seeks Jon's aid in crushing the
Boltons. Jon is hesitant until a threatening message arrives from Ramsay
demanding Sansa's return, and announcing Ramsay's possession of their brother
Rickon. Jon, Sansa, Tormund, and Brienne of Tarth set off to recruit an army to
take back Winterfell and rescue Rickon from Ramsay in "The Broken Man", but
their forces grow to only half the size of Bolton's. As the armies face each
other in "Battle of the Bastards", Ramsay murders Rickon to enrage Jon, who
rushes in with murderous fury. A devastating battle ensues in which the
outnumbered Stark forces are nearly slaughtered, until the knights of House
Arryn arrive with Sansa and Petyr Baelish and destroy the Bolton army. Jon
chases Ramsay back into Winterfell and beats him savagely, stopping before
killing him. Sansa subsequently feeds Ramsay to his own hounds. In the season
finale episode "The Winds of Winter", Bran Stark has a vision of the past which
shows Ned reuniting with a dying Lyanna in the Tower of Joy. She makes him swear
to protect her son—Jon. Meanwhile, the lords of the North name Jon as the King
in the North.

Harington was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting
Actor in a Drama Series for the role in 2016. He said, "It is a serious
understatement to say that I am somewhat stunned ... For my work on Game of
Thrones to be recognized in this way is an emotional moment for me. I could not
be more humbled." Harington was also nominated for a Saturn Award for Best
Supporting Actor on Television for the role in 2012 and 2016. He and the rest of
the cast were nominated for Screen Actors Guild Awards for Outstanding
Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series in 2012, 2014, 2015 and 2016.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gmail

Gmail is a free, advertising-supported email service developed by Google. Users
can access Gmail on the web and through the mobile apps for Android and iOS, as
well as through third-party programs that synchronize email content through POP
or IMAP protocols.

Gmail started as a limited beta release on April 1, 2004. It exited beta status
on July 7, 2009.

Gmail at launch had an initial storage capacity offer of 1 gigabyte per user, a
significantly higher number than the 2 megabytes of storage its competitors such
as Hotmail offered at that time. Today, the service comes with 15 gigabytes of
free storage. Users can receive emails up to 50 megabytes in size, including
attachments, while they can send emails up to 25 megabytes. In order to send
larger files, users can insert files from Google Drive into the message.

Gmail has a search-oriented interface and a "conversation view" similar to an
Internet forum. Gmail is noted by web developers for its pioneering use of Ajax.

Google's mail servers automatically scan emails for multiple purposes, including
to add context-sensitive advertisements next to emails, and to filter spam and
malware. Privacy advocates have raised concerns about this practice, with some
of the concerns including that the automated background scanning of emails
raises the risk that the expectation of privacy in email usage will be reduced
or eroded; information collected from emails could be retained by Google for
years after its current relevancy to build complete profiles on users; emails
sent by users from other email providers get scanned despite never having agreed
to Google's privacy policy or terms of service; governments and organizations
can potentially find it easier to legally monitor email communications; and at
any time, Google can change its current company policies to allow combining
information from emails with data gathered from use of its other services.
Google has been the subject of lawsuits concerning the issues, both from Gmail
users and from non-Gmail users.

Google has stated that "all users of email must necessarily expect that their
emails will be subject to automated processing [...] Just as a sender of a
letter to a business colleague cannot be surprised that the recipient's
assistant opens the letter, people who use web-based email today cannot be
surprised if their communications are processed by the recipient's ECS
[electronic communications service] provider in the course of delivery." Google
also claims that Gmail refrains from displaying ads next to potentially
sensitive messages, such as those that mention race, religion, sexual
orientation, health, or financial statements.

As of February 2016, Gmail has one billion active users worldwide, and was the
first app on the Google Play Store to hit one billion installations on Android
devices. According to a 2014 estimate, 60% of mid-sized US companies, and 92% of
startups, were using Gmail.

On April 1, 2004, Gmail was launched with 1 gigabytes of storage space, a
significantly higher number than the 2 megabytes of storage that Hotmail offered
at the time.

On April 1, 2005, the first anniversary of Gmail, the limit was doubled to
2 gigabytes of storage. Georges Harik, the product management director for
Gmail, stated that Google would "keep giving people more space forever."

On April 24, 2012, Google announced the increase of free storage in Gmail from
7.5 to 10 gigabytes ("and counting") as part of the launch of Google Drive.

On May 13, 2013, Google announced the overall merge of storage across Gmail,
Google Drive, and Google+ Photos, allowing users 15 gigabytes of free storage
among the three services.

Users can buy additional storage, shared among Gmail, Google Drive and Google
Photos, through a monthly subscription plan. As of 2017, storage of up to
15 gigabytes is free, and paid plans are available for up to 30 terabytes for
personal use.

There are also storage limits to individual Gmail messages. One message,
including all attachments, cannot be larger than 25 megabytes. This was changed
in March 2017, to allow receiving of email up to 50 megabytes, with the limit
for sending email staying at 25 megabytes. In order to send larger files, users
can insert files from Google Drive into the message.

The Gmail user interface initially differed from other webmail systems with its
focus on search and conversation threading of emails, grouping several messages
between two or more people onto a single page, an approach that was later copied
by its competitors. Gmail's user interface designer, Kevin Fox, intended users
to feel as if they were always on one page and just changing things on that
page, rather than having to navigate to other places.

In May 2013, Google updated the Gmail inbox with tabs which allow the
application to categorize the user's emails. The five tabs are: Primary, Social,
Promotions, Updates, and Forums. In addition to customization options, the
entire update can be disabled, allowing users to return to the traditional inbox
structure.

In November 2011, Google began rolling out a redesign of its interface that
"simplified" the look of Gmail into a more minimalist design to provide a more
consistent look throughout its products and services as part of an overall
Google design change. Major redesigned elements included a streamlined
conversation view, configurable density of information, new higher-quality
themes, a resizable navigation bar with always-visible labels and contacts, and
better search. Users were able to preview the new interface design for months
prior to the official release, as well as revert to the old interface, until
March 2012, when Google discontinued the ability to revert and completed the
transition to the new design for all users.

Gmail's spam filtering features a community-driven system: when any user marks
an email as spam, this provides information to help the system identify similar
future messages for all Gmail users.

The Gmail Labs feature, introduced on June 5, 2008, allows users to test new or
experimental features of Gmail. Users can enable or disable Labs features
selectively and provide feedback about each of them. This allows Gmail engineers
to obtain user input about new features to improve them and also to assess their
popularity.

Popular features, like the "Undo Send" option, often "graduate" from Gmail Labs
to become a formal setting in Gmail.

Gmail incorporates a search bar for searching emails. The search bar can also
search contacts, files stored in Google Drive, events from Google Calendar, and
Google Sites.

In May 2012, Gmail improved the search functionality to include auto-complete
predictions from the user's emails.

Gmail's search functionality does not support searching for word fragments (also
known as 'substring search' or partial word search). Workarounds exist.

In August 2011, Google introduced Gmail Offline, an HTML5-powered app for
providing access to the service while offline. Gmail Offline runs on the Google
Chrome browser and can be downloaded from the Chrome Web Store.

In August 2010, Google released a plugin that provides integrated telephone
service within Gmail's Google Chat interface. The feature initially lacked an
official name, with Google referring to it as both "Google Voice in Gmail chat"
and "Call Phones in Gmail". The service logged over one million calls in 24
hours.

In March 2014, Google Voice was discontinued, and replaced with functionality
from Google Hangouts, another communication platform from Google.

As of March 2015, the Gmail interface supports 72 languages, including: Arabic,
Bulgarian, Catalan, Chinese (simplified), Chinese (traditional), Croatian,
Czech, Danish, Dutch, English (UK), English (US), Estonian, Finnish, French,
German, Greek, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Icelandic, Indonesian,
Italian, Japanese, Kannada, Korean, Latvian, Lithuanian, Malay, Malayalam,
Marathi, Norwegian (Bokmål), Odia, Polish, Punjabi, Portuguese (Brazil),
Portuguese (Portugal), Romanian, Russian, Serbian, Sinhala, Slovak, Slovenian,
Spanish, Swedish, Tagalog (Filipino), Tamil, Telugu, Thai, Turkish, Ukrainian,
Urdu, Vietnamese, Welsh and Zulu.

In October 2012, Google added over 100 virtual keyboards, transliterations, and
input method editors to Gmail, enabling users different types of input styles
for different languages in an effort to help users write in languages that
aren't "limited by the language of your keyboard.”

In August 2014, Gmail became the first major email provider to let users send
and receive email from addresses with accent marks and letters from outside the
Latin alphabet.

In May 2013, Google announced the integration between Google Wallet and Gmail,
which would allow Gmail users to send money as email attachments. Although the
sender must use a Gmail account, the recipient does not need to be using a Gmail
address. The feature has no transaction fees, but there are limits to amount of
money that can be sent. Initially only available on the web, the feature was
expanded to the Android app in March 2017, for people living in the United
States.

Gmail's "basic HTML" version will work on almost all browsers. The modern AJAX
version is officially supported in the current and previous major releases of
Google Chrome, Mozilla Firefox, Internet Explorer and Safari web browsers on a
rolling basis.

In addition to the native apps on iOS and Android, users can access Gmail
through the web browser on a mobile device.

Gmail has native applications for iOS devices (including iPhone, iPad, and iPod
Touch) and for Android devices.

In November 2014, Google introduced functionality in the Gmail Android app that
enabled sending and receiving email from non-Gmail addresses (such as Yahoo!
Mail and Outlook.com) through POP or IMAP.

In November 2016, Google redesigned the Gmail app for the iOS platform, bringing
the first complete visual overhaul in "nearly four years". The update added much
more use of colors, sleeker transitions, and the addition of several
"highly-requested" features, including Undo Send, faster search with instant
results and spelling suggestions, and Swipe to Archive/Delete.

Inbox by Gmail, another app from the Gmail team, is also available for iOS and
Android devices.

Third-party programs can be used to access Gmail, using the POP or IMAP
protocols.

In October 2014, Google introduced Inbox by Gmail on an invitation-only basis.
Developed by the Gmail team, but serving as a "completely different type of
inbox", the service is made to help users deal with the challenges of an active
email. Citing issues such as distractions, difficulty in finding important
information buried in messages, and receiving more emails than ever, Inbox by
Gmail has several important differences from Gmail, including bundles that
automatically sort emails of the same topic together, highlights that surface
key information from messages, and reminders, assists, and snooze, that help the
user in handling incoming emails at appropriate times.

In September 2016, Google released Google Trips, an app that, based on
information from a user's Gmail messages, automatically generates travel cards.
A travel card contains itinerary details, such as plane tickets and car rentals,
and recommends activities, food and drinks, and attractions based on location,
time, and interests. The app also has offline functionality.

Google has supported secure HTTPS since the day it launched. In the beginning,
it was only default on the login page, a reason that Google engineer Ariel
Rideout stated was because HTTPS made "your mail slower". However, users could
manually switch to secure HTTPS mode inside the inbox after logging in. In July
2008, Google simplified the ability to manually enable secure mode, with a
toggle in the settings menu.

In 2007, Google fixed a cross-site scripting security issue that could let
attackers collect information from Gmail contact lists.

In June 2012, a new security feature was introduced to protect users from
state-sponsored attacks. A banner will appear at the top of the page that warns
users of an unauthorized account compromise.

In March 2014, Google announced that an encrypted HTTPS connection will be used
for the sending and receiving of all Gmail emails, and "every single email
message you send or receive —100% of them —is encrypted while moving internally"
through the company's systems.

Whenever possible, Gmail uses transport layer security (TLS) to automatically
encrypt emails sent and received. On the web and on Android devices, users can
check if a message is encrypted by checking if the message has a closed or open
red padlock.

Gmail automatically scans all incoming and outgoing e-mails for viruses in email
attachments. For security reasons, some file types, including executables, are
not allowed to be sent in emails.

In Google's Transparency Report under the Safer email section, it provides
information on the percentage of emails encrypted in transit between Gmail and
third-party email providers.

Gmail supports two-step verification; an optional additional measure for users
to protect their accounts when logging in.

Once enabled, users are required to verify their identity using a second method
after entering their username and password when logging in on a new device.
Common methods include entering a code sent to a user's mobile phone through a
text message, entering a code using the Google Authenticator smartphone app, or
by inserting a physical security key into the computer's USB port.

Using a security key for two-step verification was made available as an option
in October 2014.

If an algorithm detects what Google calls "abnormal usage that may indicate that
your account has been compromised", the account can be automatically locked down
for between one minute and 24 hours, depending on the type of activity detected.
Listed reasons for a lock-down include:

Google combats child pornography through Gmail's servers in conjunction with the
National Center for Missing & Exploited Children (NCMEC) to find children
suffering abuse around the world. In collaboration with the NCMEC, Google
creates a database of child pornography pictures. Each one of the images is
given a unique numerical number known as a hash. Google then scans Gmail looking
for the unique hashes. When suspicious images are located Google reports to the
authorities.

The idea for Gmail was developed by Paul Buchheit several years before it was
announced to the public. The project was known by the code name Caribou. During
early development, the project was kept secret from most of Google's own
engineers. This changed once the project became better and better, and by early
2004, almost everybody was using it to access the company's internal email
system.

Gmail was announced to the public by Google on April 1, 2004 as a limited beta
release.

In November 2006, Google began offering a Java-based application of Gmail for
mobile phones.

In October 2007, Google began a process of rewriting parts of the code that
Gmail used, which would make the service faster and add new features, such as
custom keyboard shortcuts and the ability to bookmark specific messages and
email searches. Gmail also added IMAP support in October 2007.

An update around January 2008 changed elements of Gmail's use of JavaScript, and
resulted in the failure of a third-party script some users had been using.
Google acknowledge the issue and helped users with workarounds.

Prior to December 2013, users had to approve to see images in emails, which
acted as a security measure. This changed in December 2013, when Google, citing
improved image handling, enabled images to be visible without user approval.
Images will be routed through Google's secure proxy servers rather than the
original external host servers. MarketingLand noted that the change to image
handling means email marketers will no longer be able to track the recipient's
IP address or information about what kind of device the recipient is using.
However, Wired stated that the new change means senders can track the time when
an email is first opened, as the initial loading of the images requires the
system to make a "callback" to the original server.

In June 2012, Google announced that Gmail had 425 million active users globally.

In May 2015, Google announced that Gmail had 900 million active users, 75% of
whom were using the service on mobile devices.

In February 2016, Google announced that Gmail had passed 1 billion active users.

In the business sector, Quartz reported in August 2014 that, among 150 companies
checked in three major categories in the United States (Fortune 50 largest
companies, mid-size tech and media companies, and startup companies from the
last Y Combinator incubator class), only one Fortune 50 company used Gmail -
Google itself - while 60% of mid-sized companies and 92% of startup companies
were using Gmail.

In May 2014, Gmail became the first app on the Google Play Store to hit one
billion installations on Android devices.

On February 9, 2010, Google commenced its new social networking tool, Google
Buzz, which integrated with Gmail, allowing users to share links and media, as
well as status updates.

Google Buzz was discontinued in October 2011, replaced with new functionality in
Google+, Google's then-new social networking platform.

Gmail was integrated with Google+ in December 2011, as part of an effort to have
all Google information across one Google account, with a centralized Google+
user profile. Backlash from the move caused Google to step back and remove the
requirement of a Google+ user account, keeping only a private Google account
without a public-facing profile, starting in July 2015.

In August 2006, Google announced Google Apps for Your Domain; special Google
accounts with access to several of Google's services, with additional admin
tools and custom email addresses, targeted at organizations, small businesses,
large enterprises, educational institutions, and ISPs. The project was an
expansion of the Gmail for Your Domain service launched in February 2006.

The service has gone through several rebrandings, eventually being currently
branded G Suite. G Suite includes access to popular Google services, including
Gmail, with additional advanced functionality, and more privacy, specifically
developed for different types of organizations and businesses.

Gmail was ranked second in PC World's "100 Best Products of 2005", behind
Mozilla Firefox. Gmail also won 'Honorable Mention' in the Bottom Line Design
Awards 2005. In September 2006, Forbes magazine declared Gmail to be the best
webmail application for small businesses. In November 2006, Gmail received PC
World's 4 star rating.

Google claims that Gmail refrains from displaying ads next to potentially
sensitive messages, such as those that mention race, religion, sexual
orientation, health, or financial statements.

Google's mail servers automatically scan emails for multiple purposes, including
to add context-sensitive advertisements next to emails, and to filter spam and
malware.

Privacy advocates raised concerns about this practice; concerns included that
allowing email content to be read by a machine (as opposed to a person) can
allow Google to keep unlimited amounts of information forever; the automated
background scanning of data raises the risk that the expectation of privacy in
email usage will be reduced or eroded; information collected from emails could
be retained by Google for years after its current relevancy to build complete
profiles on users; emails sent by users from other email providers get scanned
despite never having agreed to Google's privacy policy or terms of service;
Google can change its privacy policy unilaterally, and for minor changes to the
policy it can do so without informing users; in court cases, governments and
organizations can potentially find it easier to legally monitor email
communications; at any time, Google can change its current company policies to
allow combining information from emails with data gathered from use of its other
services; and any internal security problem on Google's systems can potentially
expose many - or all - of its users.

In 2004, thirty-one privacy and civil liberties organizations wrote a letter
calling upon Google to suspend its Gmail service until the privacy issues were
adequately addressed. The letter also called upon Google to clarify its written
information policies regarding data retention and data sharing among its
business units. The organizations also voiced their concerns about Google's plan
to scan the text of all incoming messages for the purposes of ad placement,
noting that the scanning of confidential email for inserting third-party ad
content violates the implicit trust of an email service provider.

In March 2011, a former Gmail user in Texas sued Google, claiming that its Gmail
service violates users' privacy by scanning e-mail messages to serve relevant
ads.

In July 2012, some California residents filed two class action lawsuits against
Google and Yahoo!, claiming that they illegally intercept emails sent by
individual non-Gmail or non-Yahoo! email users to Gmail and Yahoo! recipients
without the senders' knowledge, consent or permission. A motion filed by
Google's attorneys in the case concedes that Gmail users have "no expectation of
privacy".

A court filing uncovered by advocacy group Consumer Watchdog in August 2013
revealed that Google stated in a court filing that no "reasonable expectation"
exists among Gmail users in regard to the assured confidentiality of their
emails. In response to a lawsuit filed in May 2013, Google explained:

A Google spokesperson stated to the media on August 15, 2013 that the
corporation takes the privacy and security concerns of Gmail users "very
seriously."

In response to the update, Jim Killock, executive director of the Open Rights
Group, stated: "The really dangerous things that Google is doing are things like
the information held in Analytics, cookies in advertising and the profiling that
it is able to do on individual accounts".

In 2013, Microsoft launched an advertising campaign to attack Google for
scanning email messages, arguing that most consumers are not aware that Google
monitors their personal messages to deliver targeted ads. Microsoft claims that
its email service Outlook does not scan the contents of messages and a Microsoft
spokesperson called the issue of privacy "Google's kryptonite." In response,
Google stated; "We work hard to make sure that ads are safe, unobtrusive and
relevant ... No humans read your e-mail or Google Account information in order
to show you advertisements or related information. An automated algorithm —
similar to that used for features like Priority Inbox or spam filtering —
determines which ads are shown.” The New York Times cites "Google supporters",
who say that "Microsoft’s ads are distasteful, the last resort of a company that
has been unsuccessful at competing against Google on the more noble battleground
of products".

In January 2010, Google detected a "highly sophisticated" cyber-attack on its
infrastructure that originated from China. The targets of the attack were
Chinese human rights activists, but Google discovered that accounts belonging to
European, American and Chinese activists for human rights in China had been
"routinely accessed by third parties". Additionally, Google stated that their
investigation revealed that "at least" 20 other large companies from a "wide
range of businesses" - including the Internet, finance, technology, media and
chemical sectors - had been similarly targeted. Google was in the process of
notifying those companies and it was also working with relevant US authorities.
In light of the attacks, Google enhanced the security and architecture of its
infrastructure, and advised individual users to install anti-virus and
anti-spyware on their computers, update their operating systems and web
browsers, and be cautious when clicking on Internet links or when sharing
personal information in instant messages and emails.

The February 2010 launch of Google Buzz, a former social network that was linked
to Gmail, immediately drew criticism for publicly sharing details of users'
contacts unless the default settings were changed.

A new Gmail feature was launched in January 2014, whereby users can email people
with Google+ accounts even though they do not know the email address of the
recipient. Marc Rotenberg, President of the Electronic Privacy Information
Center, called the feature "troubling", and compared it to the Google Buzz
initial launch privacy flaw.

In June 2016, Julia Angwin of ProPublica wrote about Google's updated privacy
policy, which deleted a clause that had stated Google would not combine
DoubleClick web browsing cookie information with personally identifiable
information from its other services. This change has allowed Google to merge
users’ personally identifiable information from different Google services to
create one unified ad profile for each user. After publication of the article,
Google reached out to ProPublica to say that the merge would not include Gmail
keywords in ad targeting.

Gmail suffered at least seven outages in 2009 alone, causing doubts about the
reliability of its service. It suffered a new outage on February 28, 2011, in
which a bug caused Gmail accounts to be empty. Google stated in a blog post that
"email was never lost" and restoration was in progress. Another outage occurred
on April 17, 2012, September 24, 2013, and January 24, 2014.

Google has stated that "Gmail remains more than 99.9% available to all users,
and we're committed to keeping events like today's notable for their rarity."

In May 2009, Farhad Manjoo wrote on The New York Times blog about Gmail's "on
behalf of" tag. Manjoo explained: "The problems is, when you try to send
outbound mail from your Gmail universal inbox, Gmail adds a tag telling your
recipients that you're actually using Gmail and not your office e-mail. If your
recipient is using Microsoft Outlook, he'll see a message like, "From
youroffice@domain.com on behalf of yourgmail@gmail.com." Manjoo further wrote
that "Google explains that it adds the tag in order to prevent your e-mail from
being considered spam by your recipient; the theory is that if the e-mail is
honest about its origins, it shouldn't arouse suspicion by spam checking
software". The following July, Google announced a new option that would remove
the "On behalf of" tag, by sending the email from the server of the other email
address instead of using Gmail's servers.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nikolaj_Coster-Waldau

Nikolaj Coster-Waldau (Danish pronunciation: [neɡ̊olaɪ̯ kʰʌsd̥ɐ ˈʋald̥ɑʊ̯]; born
27 July 1970) is a Danish actor, producer and screenwriter. He graduated from
Danish National School of Theatre in Copenhagen in 1993. Coster-Waldau's
breakthrough performance in Denmark was his role in the film Nightwatch (1994).
Since then he has appeared in numerous films in his native Scandinavia and
Europe in general, including Headhunters (2011) and A Thousand Times Good Night
(2013).

In the United States, his debut film role was in the war film Black Hawk Down
(2001), playing Medal of Honor recipient Gary Gordon. He then played Detective
John Amsterdam in the short-lived Fox television series New Amsterdam (2008), as
well as appearing as Frank Pike in the 2009 Fox television film Virtuality,
originally intended as a pilot. He became widely known to a broad audience for
his current role as Ser Jaime Lannister, in the HBO series Game of Thrones. In
2017, he became one of the highest paid actors on television and earned
US$1.1 million per episode of Game of Thrones.

Coster-Waldau was born in Rudkøbing, Denmark, the son of Hanne Søborg Coster, a
librarian, and Jørgen Oscar Fritzer Waldau (died 1998). He has spoken in
interviews about his father's problems with alcohol, as well as his parents'
divorce. He has two older sisters, and was raised mainly by his mother. He grew
up in Tybjerg, a small village between Ringsted and Næstved in southern Zealand.

Coster-Waldau was the youngest actor to enter the Danish National School of
Theatre and Contemporary Dance (Danish: Statens Teaterskole), where he was
educated from 1989 to 1993. He made his stage debut as Laertes in Hamlet at the
Betty Nansen Theater. His role in the film Nightwatch (1994) brought him fame in
his native country. He then went on to play in Simon Staho’s Wildside (1998),
which he also cowrote, and starred in Danish films such as Misery Harbour
(1999). He made his British début alongside Clive Owen, Jude Law and Mick Jagger
in Bent (1997).

In 2001, he began his U.S. career in Ridley Scott's Black Hawk Down as Medal of
Honor recipient Gary Gordon. Coster-Waldau says "My first U.S. movie was Black
Hawk Down and a friend helped me put myself on tape up on the attic over my
apartment in Copenhagen. We shipped it out and I got lucky."

Coster-Waldau used his success to take roles on both sides of the Atlantic,
particularly his native Scandinavia.

He next landed a lead role in Michael Apted's Enigma and also appeared as a
villain in the action film My Name is Modesty (based upon the Modesty Blaise
comic strip). Scott brought Coster-Waldau back for his 2005 film Kingdom of
Heaven. Richard Loncraine, who cast the actor in Wimbledon in 2004, cast him in
Firewall two years later, in 2006. In 2007, he played John Amsterdam, an
immortal New York homicide detective who will become mortal after he finds his
true love, in the short-lived Fox TV drama series New Amsterdam. As a result of
filming that series' pilot, Coster-Waldau obtained his Screen Actors Guild card.
He later recalled in a 2015 interview in TV Guide, "Finally getting my SAG card
was huge for me...I got excited I went straight to the SAG online shop and
bought four mugs with SAG logo. [I] still have those mugs!"

Since April 2011, Coster-Waldau has played Jaime Lannister on HBO's hit series
Game of Thrones, based on George R. R. Martin's best-selling A Song of Ice and
Fire fantasy novel series. He commented about the character "What's not to like
about Jaime? As an actor I couldn't ask for a better role". In 2011, he also
starred alongside Sam Shepard in Mateo Gil’s feature Blackthorn and in Morten
Tyldum’s Headhunters.

Coster-Waldau starred in the 2013 horror film Mama alongside Jessica Chastain.
He went on to play Sykes, a military weapons expert in the science fiction
action thriller film Oblivion. The same year he co-starred with Juliette Binoche
in Erik Poppe's drama A Thousand Times Good Night. In 2014, he starred in
Susanne Bier's Danish thriller A Second Chance as Andreas, a police officer
forced to make a difficult choice. In 2016, Coster-Waldau appeared in the
action-fantasy film Gods of Egypt as Horus, an Egyptian God of the Air who loses
both his eye and seeks revenge for the death of his parents.

In 2015, he was confirmed to star in Roman Waugh's upcoming prison film Shot
Caller. He is also set to star in Danish 3 Things, a thriller about a prime
suspect of a bank robbery who negotiates the terms of his witness protection
deal. In 2017, he is set to star in the psychological thriller Spinning Man, the
US debut of his fellow Dane director Peter Flinth as well as in E.L. Katz's dark
comedy Small Crimes.

Coster-Waldau married Nukâka, a Greenlandic actress and singer, in 1998, and
they live in Kongens Lyngby with their two children, daughters Filippa (born
October 2000) and Safina (born November 2003), as well as two dogs.

Filippa has starred in a Danish short film, The Girl and the Dogs, which was
shown at the Cannes Film Festival in 2014.

His father-in-law is Josef Motzfeldt, a member of the Parliament of Greenland
and former leader of the Community of the People party.

He is a supporter of English football club Leeds United and he is a member of
the Leeds United Supporter's Trust.

Coster-Waldau has been supporting Danish Red Cross since 2003. In 2016, he
announced a Game of Thrones campaign-contest in order to support RED foundation
which aims to raise awareness and fight AIDS.

Since September 2016 he has been appointed UNDP Goodwill Ambassador to raise
awareness and support United Nations' Sustainable Development Goals, an action
to end poverty, fight inequality and stop climate change. In 2017 Coster-Waldau
partnered with Google, using Street View to document the impact of global
warming in Greenland, in order to increase awareness and highlight climate
change. After participating in a female empowerment initiative in Kenya, on the
occasion of International Women's Day in 2017, he wrote a pledge calling for all
fathers to support gender equality and women's empowerment, including those
women who live in extreme poverty and are exposed to practises like child
marriage.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norway

Norway (i/ˈnɔːrweɪ/ NAWR-way; Norwegian:  Norge (Bokmål) or  Noreg (Nynorsk)
officially the Kingdom of Norway, is a sovereign and unitary monarchy whose
territory comprises the western portion of the Scandinavian Peninsula plus the
island Jan Mayen and the archipelago of Svalbard.[note 1] The Antarctic Peter I
Island and the sub-Antarctic Bouvet Island are dependent territories and thus
not considered part of the Kingdom. Norway also lays claim to a section of
Antarctica known as Queen Maud Land. Until 1814, the Kingdom included the Faroe
Islands (since 1035), Greenland (1261), and Iceland (1262). It also included
Isle of Man until 1266, Shetland and Orkney until 1468, and the following
provinces, now in Sweden: Jämtland, Härjedalen and Bohuslän.

Norway has a total area of 385,252 square kilometres (148,747 sq mi) and a
population of 5,213,985 (May 2016). The country shares a long eastern border
with Sweden (1,619 km or 1,006 mi long). Norway is bordered by Finland and
Russia to the north-east, and the Skagerrak Strait to the south, with Denmark on
the other side. Norway has an extensive coastline, facing the North Atlantic
Ocean and the Barents Sea.

King Harald V of the Dano-German House of Glücksburg is the current King of
Norway. Erna Solberg became Prime Minister in 2013, replacing Jens Stoltenberg.
A constitutional monarchy, Norway divides state power between the Parliament,
the Cabinet, and the Supreme Court, as determined by the 1814 Constitution. The
Kingdom is established as a merger of several petty kingdoms. By the traditional
count from the year 872 the Kingdom has existed continuously for 1,144 years,
and the list of Norwegian monarchs includes over sixty kings and earls.

Norway has both administrative and political subdivisions on two levels:
counties and municipalities. The Sámi people have a certain amount of
self-determination and influence over traditional territories through the Sámi
Parliament and the Finnmark Act. Norway maintains close ties with the European
Union and the United States. Norway is a founding member of the United Nations,
NATO, the Council of Europe, the Antarctic Treaty and the Nordic Council; a
member of the European Economic Area, the WTO and the OECD; and is also a part
of the Schengen Area.

The country maintains a combination of market economy and a Nordic welfare model
with universal health care and a comprehensive social security system. Norway
has extensive reserves of petroleum, natural gas, minerals, lumber, seafood,
fresh water, and hydropower. The petroleum industry accounts for around a
quarter of the country's gross domestic product (GDP). On a per-capita basis,
Norway is the world's largest producer of oil and natural gas outside the Middle
East.

The country has the fourth-highest per capita income in the world on the World
Bank and IMF lists. On the CIA's GDP (PPP) per capita list (2015 estimate) which
includes territories and some regions, Norway ranks as number eleven. From 2001
to 2006, and then again from 2009 to 2015, Norway had the highest Human
Development Index ranking in the world. Norway has topped the Legatum Prosperity
Index for seven years in a row as of 2015[update]. Norway also ranks first on
the OECD Better Life Index, the Index of Public Integrity, and the Democracy
Index.

Norway has two official names: Noreg in Nynorsk (Old Norse: Noregr) and Norge in
Bokmål (Old Norse: Noregi, dative of Noregr).

The name Norway comes from the Old English word Norðrveg(r) mentioned in 880,
meaning "northern way" or "way leading to the north", which the Anglo-Saxon
named the coastline of atlantic Norway. In contrasting with suðrvegar "southern
way" for Germany, and austrvegr "eastern way" for the Baltic.[citation needed]
The Anglo-Saxon of Britain also referred to the kingdom of Norway in 880 as
Norðmanna land.

Philology professor Michael Schulte has suggested that early European
inhabitants in what is now southwestern Norway referred to the area as Nuruiak,
Nuriki (Nur- :narrow, -riki :kingdom), and later Noregr (Nore- :narrow
-gr :way)--all Old Norse words, which refer to the inner-archipelago sailing
route through the land. This was the home area of Harald Fairhair, the first
king of Norway, and because of him, the name was extended to the entire
country.[citation needed] The newer interpretation of the syllable is Norvegr,
where nor(ve)- means narrow (Nynorsk: norve) and -(ve)gr (Nynorsk: veg) means
way that refers to the sailing routes through the straits of Norway. The old
meaning of the word is interpreted as "The narrow way through the strait". Nore
is still used in placenames like example the village of Nore and lake
Norefjorden in Buskerud county, and has still the same meaning.

In a Latin manuscript of 849, the name Northuagia is mentioned, while a French
chronicle of c. 900 uses the names Northwegia and Norwegia. When Ohthere of
Hålogaland visited King Alfred the Great in England in the end of the 9th
century, the land was called Norðwegr (lit. Northway) and norðmanna land (lit.
Northmen's land).

Old Norse norðmaðr was Latinized as Nortmannus in the 9th century to mean
"Norseman" and also "Viking", giving rise to the name of the Normans. After
Norway had become Christian, Noregr and Noregi had become the most common forms,
but during the 15th century the newer forms Noreg(h) and Norg(h)e, found in
medieval Icelandic manuscripts,[citation needed] took over and have survived
until modern day.

The Old Norse name Noregr (narrow strait) was borrowed into Old English, and was
according to language student and activist Klaus Johan Myrvoll, first revealed
by philologist Niels Halvorsen Trønnes in 1847, as misinterpreted for Norðweg
and Norweg (northern way), giving rise to modern Norway by regular development
via Middle English Norwei and Norwey. The letter ð was not used in any Old Norse
spellings of the name Norway, and was wrongly added into the English word,
changing the meaning to North (Old English: Norðr, Norwegian: Nord), who also
influenced the old Latin names as Nortwegia and Northmannia with the same
spelling mistake.

The adjective Norwegian, on the other hand, recorded from c. 1600, is derived
from the latinisation of the name as Norwegia.[citation needed] In the adjective
Norwegian, the Old English spelling '-weg' has survived.

The first inhabitants were the Ahrensburg culture (11th to 10th millennia BC),
which was a late Upper Paleolithic culture during the Younger Dryas, the last
period of cold at the end of the Weichsel glaciation. The culture is named after
the village of Ahrensburg, 25 km (15.53 mi) north-east of Hamburg in the German
state of Schleswig-Holstein, where wooden arrow shafts and clubs have been
excavated. The earliest traces of human occupation in Norway are found along the
coast, where the huge ice shelf of the last ice age first melted between 11,000
and 8,000 BC. The oldest finds are stone tools dating from 9,500 to 6,000 BC,
discovered in Finnmark (Komsa culture) in the north and Rogaland (Fosna culture)
in the south-west. However, theories about two altogether different cultures
(the Komsa culture north of the Arctic Circle being one and the Fosna culture
from Trøndelag to Oslo Fjord being the other) were rendered obsolete in the
1970s.

In the southern part of the country are dwelling sites dating from about 5,000
BC. Finds from these sites give a clearer idea of the life of the hunting and
fishing peoples. The implements vary in shape and mostly are made of different
kinds of stone; those of later periods are more skilfully made. Rock carvings
(i.e. petroglyphs) have been found, usually near hunting and fishing grounds.
They represent game such as deer, reindeer, elk, bears, birds, seals, whales,
and fish (especially salmon and halibut), all of which were vital to the way of
life of the coastal peoples. The carvings at Alta in Finnmark, the largest in
Scandinavia, were made at sea level from 4,200 to 500 BC and mark the
progression of the land as the sea rose after the last ice age ended (Rock
carvings at Alta).

Between 3000 and 2500 BC new settlers (Corded Ware culture) arrived in eastern
Norway. They were Indo-European farmers who grew grain and kept cows and sheep.
The hunting-fishing population of the west coast was also gradually replaced by
farmers, though hunting and fishing remained useful secondary means of
livelihood.

From about 1500 BC bronze was gradually introduced, but the use of stone
implements continued; Norway had few riches to barter for bronze goods, and the
few finds consist mostly of elaborate weapons and brooches that only chieftains
could afford. Huge burial cairns built close to the sea as far north as Harstad
and also inland in the south are characteristic of this period. The motifs of
the rock carvings differ from those typical of the Stone Age. Representations of
the Sun, animals, trees, weapons, ships, and people are all strongly stylised.

Thousands of rock carvings from this period depict ships, and the large stone
burial monuments known as stone ships, suggest that ships and seafaring played
an important role in the culture at large. The depicted ships, most likely
represent sewn plank built canoes used for warfare, fishing and trade. These
ship types may have their origin as far back as the neolithic period and they
continue into the Pre-Roman Iron Age, as exemplified by the Hjortspring boat.

Little has been found dating from the early Iron Age (the last 500 years BC).
The dead were cremated, and their graves contain few burial goods. During the
first four centuries AD the people of Norway were in contact with Roman-occupied
Gaul. About 70 Roman bronze cauldrons, often used as burial urns, have been
found. Contact with the civilised countries farther south brought a knowledge of
runes; the oldest known Norwegian runic inscription dates from the 3rd century.
At this time the amount of settled area in the country increased, a development
that can be traced by coordinated studies of topography, archaeology, and
place-names. The oldest root names, such as nes, vik, and bø ("cape," "bay," and
"farm"), are of great antiquity, dating perhaps from the Bronze Age, whereas the
earliest of the groups of compound names with the suffixes vin ("meadow") or
heim ("settlement"), as in Bjorgvin (Bergen) or Saeheim (Seim), usually date
from the 1st century AD.

Archaeologists first made the decision to divide the Iron Age of Northern Europe
into distinct pre-Roman and Roman Iron Ages after Emil Vedel unearthed a number
of Iron Age artefacts in 1866 on the island of Bornholm. They did not exhibit
the same permeating Roman influence seen in most other artefacts from the early
centuries AD, indicating that parts of northern Europe had not yet come into
contact with the Romans at the beginning of the Iron Age.

The destruction of the Western Roman Empire by the Germanic peoples in the 5th
century is characterised by rich finds, including tribal chiefs' graves
containing magnificent weapons and gold objects.[citation needed] Hill forts
were built on precipitous rocks for defence. Excavation has revealed stone
foundations of farmhouses 18 to 27 metres (59 to 89 ft) long—one even 46 metres
(151 feet) long—the roofs of which were supported on wooden posts. These houses
were family homesteads where several generations lived together, with people and
cattle under one roof.[citation needed]

These states were based on either clans or tribes (e.g., the Horder of Hordaland
in western Norway). By the 9th century, each of these small states had things
(local or regional assemblies),[citation needed] for negotiating and settling
disputes. The thing meeting places, each eventually with a hörgr (open-air
sanctuary) or a heathen hof (temple; literally "hill"), were usually situated on
the oldest and best farms, which belonged to the chieftains and wealthiest
farmers. The regional things united to form even larger units: assemblies of
deputy yeomen from several regions. In this way, the lagting (assemblies for
negotiations and lawmaking) developed. The Gulating had its meeting place by
Sognefjord and may have been the centre of an aristocratic
confederation[citation needed] along the western fjords and islands called the
Gulatingslag. The Frostating was the assembly for the leaders in the
Trondheimsfjord area; the Earls of Lade, near Trondheim, seem to have enlarged
the Frostatingslag by adding the coastland from Romsdalsfjord to
Lofoten.[citation needed]

From the 8th to the 10th century, the wider Scandinavian region was the source
of Vikings. The looting of the monastery at Lindisfarne in Northeast England in
793 by Norse people has long been regarded as the event which marked the
beginning of the Viking Age. This age was characterised by expansion and
emigration by Viking seafarers. They colonised, raided, and traded in all parts
of Europe. Norwegian Viking explorers first discovered Iceland by accident in
the 9th century when heading for the Faroe Islands, and eventually came across
Vinland, known today as Newfoundland, in Canada. The Vikings from Norway were
most active in the northern and western British Isles and eastern North America
isles.[citation needed]

According to tradition, Harald Fairhair unified them into one in 872 after the
Battle of Hafrsfjord in Stavanger, thus becoming the first king of a united
Norway. Harald's realm was mainly a South Norwegian coastal state. Fairhair
ruled with a strong hand and according to the sagas, many Norwegians left the
country to live in Iceland, the Faroe Islands, Greenland, and parts of Britain
and Ireland. The modern-day Irish cities of Dublin, Limerick and Waterford were
founded by Norwegian settlers.

Norse traditions were slowly replaced by Christian ones in the late 10th and
early 11th centuries.One of the most important sources for the history of the
11th century Vikings is the treaty between the Icelanders and Olaf Haraldsson,
king of Norway circa 1015 to 1028. This is largely attributed to the missionary
kings Olav Tryggvasson and St. Olav. Haakon the Good was Norway's first
Christian king, in the mid-10th century, though his attempt to introduce the
religion was rejected. Born sometime in between 963–969, Olav Tryggvasson set
off raiding in England with 390 ships. He attacked London during this raiding.
Arriving back in Norway in 995, Olav landed in Moster. There he built a church
which became the first Christian church ever built in Norway. From Moster, Olav
sailed north to Trondheim where he was proclaimed King of Norway by the
Eyrathing in 995.

Feudalism never really developed in Norway or Sweden, as it did in the rest of
Europe. However, the administration of government took on a very conservative
feudal character. The Hanseatic League forced the royalty to cede to them
greater and greater concessions over foreign trade and the economy. The League
had this hold over the royalty because of the loans the Hansa had made to the
royalty and the large debt the kings were carrying. The League's monopolistic
control over the economy of Norway put pressure on all classes, especially the
peasantry, to the degree that no real burgher class existed in Norway.

Upon the death of Haakon V, King of Norway, in 1319, Magnus Erikson, at just
three years old, inherited the throne as King Magnus VII of Norway. At the same
time a movement to make Magnus King of Sweden proved successful. (At this time
both the kings of Sweden and of Denmark were elected to the throne by their
respective nobles.) Thus, with his election to the throne of Sweden, both Sweden
and Norway were united under King Magnus VII.

In 1349, the Black Death radically altered Norway, killing between 50% and 60%
of its population and leaving it in a period of social and economic decline. The
plague left Norway very poor. Although the death rate was comparable with the
rest of Europe, economic recovery took much longer because of the small,
scattered population. Before the plague, the population was only about 500,000
people. After the plague, many farms lay idle while the population slowly
increased. However, the few surviving farms' tenants found their bargaining
positions with their landlords greatly strengthened.

King Magnus VII ruled Norway until 1350, when his son, Haakon, was placed on the
throne as Haakon VI. In 1363, Haakon VI married Margaret, the daughter of King
Valdemar IV of Denmark. Upon the death of Haakon VI, in 1379, his son, Olaf IV,
was only 10 years old. Olaf had already been elected to the throne of Denmark on
3 May 1376. Thus, upon Olaf's accession to the throne of Norway, Denmark and
Norway entered personal union. Olaf's mother and Haakon's widow, Queen Margaret,
managed the foreign affairs of Denmark and Norway during the minority of Olaf
IV.

Margaret was working toward a union of Sweden with Denmark and Norway by having
Olaf elected to the Swedish throne. She was on the verge of achieving this goal
when Olaf IV suddenly died. However, Denmark made Margaret temporary ruler upon
the death of Olaf. On 2 February 1388 Norway followed suit and crowned Margaret.
Queen Margaret knew that her power would be more secure if she were able to find
a king to rule in her place. She settled on Eric of Pomerania, grandson of her
sister. Thus at an all-Scandinavian meeting held at Kalmar, Erik of Pomerania
was crowned king of all three Scandinavian countries. Thus, royal politics
resulted in personal unions between the Nordic countries, eventually bringing
the thrones of Norway, Denmark, and Sweden under the control of Queen Margaret
when the country entered into the Kalmar Union.

After Sweden broke out of the Kalmar Union in 1521, Norway tried to follow
suit,[citation needed] but the subsequent rebellion was defeated, and Norway
remained in a union with Denmark until 1814, a total of 434 years. During the
national romanticism of the 19th century, this period was by some referred to as
the "400-Year Night", since all of the kingdom's royal, intellectual, and
administrative power was centred in Copenhagen in Denmark. In fact, it was a
period of great prosperity and progress for Norway, especially in terms of
shipping and foreign trade, and it also secured the country's revival from the
demographic catastrophe it suffered in the Black Death. Based on the respective
natural resources, Denmark–Norway was in fact a very good match, since Denmark
supported Norway's needs for grain and food supplies, and Norway supplied
Denmark with timber, metal, and fish.

With the introduction of Protestantism in 1536, the archbishopric in Trondheim
was dissolved, and Norway lost its independence, and effectually became a colony
of Denmark. The Church's incomes and possessions were instead redirected to the
court in Copenhagen. Norway lost the steady stream of pilgrims to the relics of
St. Olav at the Nidaros shrine, and with them, much of the contact with cultural
and economic life in the rest of Europe.

Eventually restored as a kingdom (albeit in legislative union with Denmark) in
1661, Norway saw its land area decrease in the 17th century with the loss of the
provinces Båhuslen, Jemtland, and Herjedalen to Sweden, as the result of a
number of disastrous wars with Sweden. In the north, however, its territory was
increased by the acquisition of the northern provinces of Troms and Finnmark, at
the expense of Sweden and Russia.

The famine of 1695–96 killed roughly 10% of Norway's population. The harvest
failed in Scandinavia at least nine times between 1740 and 1800, with great loss
of life.

After Denmark–Norway was attacked by the United Kingdom at the Battle of
Copenhagen, it entered into an alliance with Napoleon, with the war leading to
dire conditions and mass starvation in 1812. As the Danish kingdom found itself
on the losing side in 1814, it was forced, under terms of the Treaty of Kiel, to
cede Norway to the king of Sweden, while the old Norwegian provinces of Iceland,
Greenland, and the Faroe Islands remained with the Danish crown.

Norway took this opportunity to declare independence, adopted a constitution
based on American and French models, and elected the Crown Prince of Denmark and
Norway, Christian Frederick, as king on 17 May 1814. This is the famous Syttende
Mai (Seventeenth of May) holiday celebrated by Norwegians and
Norwegian-Americans alike. Syttende Mai is also called Norwegian Constitution
Day.

Norwegian opposition to the great powers' decision to link Norway with Sweden
caused the Norwegian-Swedish War to break out as Sweden tried to subdue Norway
by military means. As Sweden's military was not strong enough to defeat the
Norwegian forces outright and Norway's treasury was not large enough to support
a protracted war, and as British and Russian navies blockaded the Norwegian
coast, the belligerents were forced to negotiate the Convention of Moss.
According to the terms of the convention, Christian Frederik abdicated the
Norwegian throne and authorised the Parliament of Norway to make the necessary
constitutional amendments to allow for the personal union that Norway was forced
to accept. On 4 November 1814 the Parliament (Storting) elected Charles XIII of
Sweden as king of Norway, thereby establishing the union with Sweden. Under this
arrangement, Norway kept its liberal constitution and its own independent
institutions, except for the foreign service. Following the recession caused by
the Napoleonic Wars, economic development of Norway remained slow until economic
growth began around 1830.

This period also saw the rise of the Norwegian romantic nationalism, as
Norwegians sought to define and express a distinct national character. The
movement covered all branches of culture, including literature (Henrik Wergeland
[1808–1845], Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson [1832–1910], Peter Christen Asbjørnsen
[1812–1845], Jørgen Moe [1813–1882]), painting (Hans Gude [1825–1903], Adolph
Tidemand [1814–1876]), music (Edvard Grieg [1843–1907]), and even language
policy, where attempts to define a native written language for Norway led to
today's two official written forms for Norwegian: Bokmål and Nynorsk.

King Charles III John, who came to the throne of Norway and Sweden in 1818, was
the second king following Norway's break from Denmark and the union with Sweden.
Charles John was a complex man whose long reign extended to 1844. He protected
the constitution and liberties of Norway and Sweden during the age of
Metternich. As such, he was regarded as a liberal monarch for that age. However,
he was ruthless in his use of paid informers, the secret police and restrictions
on the freedom of the press to put down public movements for reform—especially
the Norwegian national independence movement.

The Romantic Era that followed the reign of King Charles III John brought some
significant social and political reforms. In 1854, women won the right to
inherit property in their own right just like men. In 1863, the last trace of
keeping unmarried women in the status of minors was removed. Furthermore, women
were then eligible for different occupations, particularly the common school
teacher. However, by mid-century, Norway was still far from a "democracy".
Voting was limited to officials, property owners, leaseholders, and burghers of
incorporated towns. There was some dissatisfaction with this system.[citation
needed]

Still Norway remained a conservative society. Life in Norway (especially
economic life) was "dominated by the aristocracy of professional men who filled
most of the important posts in the central government." There was no strong
bourgeosie class in Norway to demand a breakdown of this aristocratic control of
the economy. Thus, even while revolution swept over most of the countries of
Europe in 1848, Norway was largely unaffected by revolts that year.

Marcus Thrane was a Utopian socialist. He made his appeal to the labouring
classes urging a change of social structure "from below upwards." In 1848, he
organised a labour society in Drammen. In just a few months this society had a
membership of 500 and was publishing its own newspaper. Within two years 300
societies had been organised all over Norway with a total membership of 20,000
persons. The membership was drawn from the lower classes of both urban and rural
areas; for the first time these two groups felt they had a common cause. In the
end, the revolt was easily crushed; Thrane was captured and in 1855, after four
years in jail, was sentenced to three additional years for crimes against the
safety of the state. Upon his release, Marcus Thrane attempted unsuccessfully to
revitalise his movement but, after the death of his wife, migrated to the United
States.

In 1898, all men were granted universal suffrage, followed by all women in 1913.

Christian Michelsen, a shipping magnate and statesman, and Prime Minister of
Norway from 1905 to 1907, played a central role in the peaceful separation of
Norway from Sweden on 7 June 1905. A national referendum confirmed the people's
preference for a monarchy over a republic. No Norwegian could legitimately claim
the throne because none was able to prove relationship to medieval royalty and
in European tradition royal or "blue" blood is a precondition for laying claim
to the throne.

The government offered the throne of Norway to a prince of the Dano-German royal
house of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg. Prince Carl of Denmark was
unanimously elected king by the Norwegian Parliament, the first king of a fully
independent Norway in 508 years (1397: Kalmar Union); he took the name Haakon
VII. In 1905, the country welcomed the prince from neighbouring Denmark, his
wife Maud of Wales and their young son to re-establish Norway's royal house.
Following centuries of close ties between Norway and Denmark, a prince from the
latter was the obvious choice for a European prince who could best relate to the
Norwegian people.

Throughout the First World War, Norway was in principle a neutral country. In
reality, however, Norway had been pressured by the British to hand over
increasingly large parts of its large merchant fleet to the British at low
rates, as well as to join the trade blockade against Germany. Norwegian merchant
marine ships, often with Norwegian sailors still on board, were then sailing
under the British flag and at risk of being sunk by German submarines. Thus,
many Norwegian sailors and ships were lost. Thereafter, the world ranking of the
Norwegian merchant navy fell from fourth place to sixth in the world.

Norway also proclaimed its neutrality during the Second World War, but despite
this it was invaded by German forces on 9 April 1940. Although Norway was
unprepared for the German surprise attack (see: Battle of Drøbak Sound,
Norwegian Campaign, and Invasion of Norway), military and naval resistance
lasted for two months. Norwegian armed forces in the north launched an offensive
against the German forces in the Battles of Narvik, until they were forced to
surrender on 10 June after losing British support which had been diverted to
France during the German invasion of France.

King Haakon and the Norwegian government escaped to Rotherhithe in London.
Throughout the war they sent inspirational radio speeches and supported
clandestine military actions in Norway against the Germans. On the day of the
invasion, the leader of the small National-Socialist party Nasjonal Samling,
Vidkun Quisling, tried to seize power but was forced by the German occupiers to
step aside. Real power was wielded by the leader of the German occupation
authority, Reichskommissar Josef Terboven. Quisling, as minister president,
later formed a collaborationist government under German control. Up to 15,000
Norwegians volunteered to fight in German units, including the Waffen-SS.

The fraction of the Norwegian population that supported Germany was
traditionally smaller than in Sweden but greater than is generally appreciated
today.[citation needed] It included a number of prominent personalities such as
Knut Hamsun. The concept of a "Germanic Union" of member states fit well into
their thoroughly nationalist-patriotic ideology.

Many Norwegians and persons of Norwegian descent joined the Allied forces as
well as the Free Norwegian Forces. In June 1940 a small group had left Norway
following their king to Britain. This group included 13 ships, five aircraft,
and 500 men from the Royal Norwegian Navy. By the end of the war, the force had
grown to 58 ships and 7,500 men in service in the Royal Norwegian Navy, 5
squadrons of aircraft (including Spitfires, Sunderland flying boats and
Mosquitos) in the newly formed Norwegian Air Force, and land forces including
the Norwegian Independent Company 1 and 5 Troop as well as No. 10
Commandos.[citation needed]

During the five years of German occupation, Norwegians built a resistance
movement which fought the German occupation forces with both civil disobedience
and armed resistance including the destruction of Norsk Hydro's heavy water
plant and stockpile of heavy water at Vemork, which crippled the German nuclear
programme (see: Norwegian heavy water sabotage). More important to the Allied
war effort, however, was the role of the Norwegian Merchant Marine. At the time
of the invasion, Norway had the 4th largest merchant marine fleet in the world.
It was led by the Norwegian shipping company Nortraship under the Allies
throughout the war and took part in every war operation from the evacuation of
Dunkirk to the Normandy landings. Each December Norway gives a Christmas tree to
the United Kingdom as thanks for the British assistance during the Second World
War. A ceremony takes place to erect the tree in London's Trafalgar Square.

From 1945 to 1962, the Labour Party held an absolute majority in the parliament.
The government, led by prime minister Einar Gerhardsen, embarked on a programme
inspired by Keynesian economics, emphasising state financed industrialisation
and co-operation between trade unions and employers' organisations. Many
measures of state control of the economy imposed during the war were continued,
although the rationing of dairy products was lifted in 1949, while price control
and rationing of housing and cars continued as long as until 1960.

The wartime alliance with the United Kingdom and the United States was continued
in the post-war years. Although pursuing the goal of a socialist economy, the
Labour Party distanced itself from the Communists (especially after the
Communists' seizure of power in Czechoslovakia in 1948), and strengthened its
foreign policy and defence policy ties with the US. Norway received Marshall
Plan aid from the United States starting in 1947, joined the OEEC one year
later, and became a founding member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) in 1949.

In 1969, the Phillips Petroleum Company discovered petroleum resources at the
Ekofisk field west of Norway. In 1973, the Norwegian government founded the
State oil company, Statoil. Oil production did not provide net income until the
early 1980s because of the large capital investment that was required to
establish the country's petroleum industry. Around 1975, both the proportion and
absolute number of workers in industry peaked. Since then labour-intensive
industries and services like factory mass production and shipping have largely
been outsourced.

Norway was a founding member of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA). Two
referendums on joining the European Union failed by narrow margins in 1972 and
1994.

In 1981, a Conservative government led by Kåre Willoch replaced the Labour Party
with a policy of stimulating the stagflated economy with tax cuts, economic
liberalisation, deregulation of markets, and measures to curb record-high
inflation (13.6% in 1981).

Norway's first female prime minister, Gro Harlem Brundtland of the Labour party,
continued many of the reforms of her conservative predecessor, while backing
traditional Labour concerns such as social security, high taxes, the
industrialisation of nature, and feminism. By the late 1990s, Norway had paid
off its foreign debt and had started accumulating a sovereign wealth fund. Since
the 1990s, a divisive question in politics has been how much of the income from
petroleum production the government should spend, and how much it should save.

In 2011, Norway suffered two terrorist attacks on the same day conducted by
Anders Behring Breivik which struck the government quarter in Oslo and a summer
camp of the Labour party's youth movement at Utøya island, resulting in 77
deaths and 319 wounded.

The 2013 Norwegian parliamentary election brought a more conservative government
to power with the Conservative Party and the Progress Party, winning 43% of the
electorate's votes.

Norway comprises the western part of Scandinavia in Northern Europe. The rugged
coastline, broken by huge fjords and thousands of islands, stretches 25,000
kilometres (16,000 mi) and 83,000 kilometres (52,000 mi). Norway shares a
1,619-kilometre (1,006 mi) land border with Sweden, 727 kilometres (452 mi) with
Finland, and 196 kilometres (122 mi) with Russia to the east. To the north, west
and south, Norway is bordered by the Barents Sea, the Norwegian Sea, the North
Sea, and Skagerrak. The Scandinavian Mountains form much of the border with
Sweden.

At 385,252 square kilometres (148,747 sq mi) (including Svalbard and Jan Mayen)
(and 323,802 square kilometres (125,021 sq mi) without), much of the country is
dominated by mountainous or high terrain, with a great variety of natural
features caused by prehistoric glaciers and varied topography. The most
noticeable of these are the fjords: deep grooves cut into the land flooded by
the sea following the end of the Ice Age. Sognefjorden is the world's second
deepest fjord, and the world's longest at 204 kilometres (127 mi).
Hornindalsvatnet is the deepest lake in all Europe. Permafrost can be found all
year in the higher mountain areas and in the interior of Finnmark county.
Numerous glaciers are found in Norway.

The land is mostly made of hard granite and gneiss rock, but slate, sandstone,
and limestone are also common, and the lowest elevations contain marine
deposits. Because of the Gulf Stream and prevailing westerlies, Norway
experiences higher temperatures and more precipitation than expected at such
northern latitudes, especially along the coast. The mainland experiences four
distinct seasons, with colder winters and less precipitation inland. The
northernmost part has a mostly maritime Subarctic climate, while Svalbard has an
Arctic tundra climate.

Because of the large latitudinal range of the country and the varied topography
and climate, Norway has a larger number of different habitats than almost any
other European country. There are approximately 60,000 species in Norway and
adjacent waters (excluding bacteria and virus). The Norwegian Shelf large marine
ecosystem is considered highly productive.

The southern and western parts of Norway, fully exposed to Atlantic storm
fronts, experience more precipitation and have milder winters than the eastern
and far northern parts. Areas to the east of the coastal mountains are in a rain
shadow, and have lower rain and snow totals than the west. The lowlands around
Oslo have the warmest and sunniest summers, but also cold weather and snow in
wintertime.[citation needed]

Because of Norway's high latitude, there are large seasonal variations in
daylight. From late May to late July, the sun never completely descends beneath
the horizon in areas north of the Arctic Circle (hence Norway's description as
the "Land of the Midnight Sun"), and the rest of the country experiences up to
20 hours of daylight per day. Conversely, from late November to late January,
the sun never rises above the horizon in the north, and daylight hours are very
short in the rest of the country.

The coastal climate of Norway is exceptionally mild compared with areas on
similar latitudes elsewhere in the world, with the Gulf Stream passing directly
offshore the northern areas of the Atlantic coast, continuously warming the
region in the winter. Temperature anomalies found in coastal locations are
exceptional, with Røst and Værøy lacking a meteorological winter in spite of
being north of the Arctic Circle. The Gulf Stream has this effect only on the
northern parts of Norway, not in the south, despite what is commonly believed.
The northern coast of Norway would thus be ice-covered if not for the Gulf
Stream. As a side-effect, the Scandinavian Mountains prevent continental winds
from reaching the coastline, causing very cool summers throughout Atlantic
Norway. Oslo has more of a continental climate, similar to Sweden's. The
mountain ranges have subarctic and tundra climates. There is also very high
rainfall in areas exposed to the Atlantic, such as Bergen. Oslo, in comparison,
is dry, being in a rain shadow. Skjåk in Oppland county is also in the rain
shadow and is one of the driest places with 278 millimetres (10.9 inches)
precipitation annually. Finnmarksvidda and the interior valleys of Troms and
Nordland also receive less than 300 millimetres (12 inches) annually.
Longyearbyen is the driest place in Norway with 190 millimetres (7.5 inches).

Parts of southeastern Norway including parts of Mjøsa have warm-summer humid
continental climates (Köppen Dfb), while the more southern and western coasts
are mostly of the oceanic climate (Cfb). Further inland in (southeastern and
northern Norway, subarctic climate (Dfc) dominates; this is especially true for
areas in the rain shadow of the Scandinavian Mountains. Some of the inner
valleys of Oppland get so little precipitation annually, thanks to the rain
shadow effect, that they meet the requirements for dry-summer subarctic climates
(Dsc). In higher altitudes, close to the coasts of southern and western Norway,
one can find the rare subpolar oceanic climate (Cfc). This climate is also
common in Northern Norway but there usually in lower altitudes, all the way down
to sea level. A small part of the northernmost coast of Norway has the
tundra/alpine/polar climate (ET). Large parts of Norway are covered by mountains
and high altitude plateaus, many of which also exhibit the tundra/alpine/polar
climate (ET).[citation needed]

The total number of species include 16,000 species of insects (probably 4,000
more species yet to be described), 20,000 species of algae, 1,800 species of
lichen, 1,050 species of mosses, 2,800 species of vascular plants, up to 7,000
species of fungi, 450 species of birds (250 species nesting in Norway), 90
species of mammals, 45 fresh-water species of fish, 150 salt-water species of
fish, 1,000 species of fresh-water invertebrates, and 3,500 species of
salt-water invertebrates. About 40,000 of these species have been described by
science. The red list of 2010 encompasses 4,599 species.

Seventeen species are listed mainly because they are endangered on a global
scale, such as the European beaver, even if the population in Norway is not seen
as endangered. The number of threatened and near-threatened species equals to
3,682; it includes 418 fungi species, many of which are closely associated with
the small remaining areas of old-growth forests, 36 bird species, and 16 species
of mammals. In 2010, 2,398 species were listed as endangered or vulnerable; of
these were 1250 listed as vulnerable (VU), 871 as endangered (EN), and 276
species as critically endangered (CR), among which were the grey wolf, the
Arctic fox (healthy population on Svalbard) and the pool frog.

The largest predator in Norwegian waters is the sperm whale, and the largest
fish is the basking shark. The largest predator on land is the polar bear, while
the brown bear is the largest predator on the Norwegian mainland. The largest
land animal on the mainland is the elk (American English: moose). The elk is in
Norway known for its size and strength and is often called skogens konge, "king
of the forest".

Stunning and dramatic scenery and landscape is found throughout Norway. The west
coast of southern Norway and the coast of northern Norway present some of the
most visually impressive coastal sceneries in the world. National Geographic has
listed the Norwegian fjords as the world's top tourist attraction. The 2014
Environmental Performance Index put Norway in tenth place, based on the
environmental performance of the country's policies.

Norway is considered to be one of the most developed democracies and states of
justice in the world. From 1814, c. 45% of men (25 years and older) had the
right to vote, whereas the United Kingdom had c. 20% (1832), Sweden c. 5%
(1866), and Belgium c. 1.15% (1840). Since 2010, Norway has been classified as
the world's most democratic country by the Democracy Index.

According to the Constitution of Norway, which was adopted on 17 May 1814 and
inspired by the United States Declaration of Independence and French Revolution
of 1776 and 1789, respectively, Norway is a unitary constitutional monarchy with
a parliamentary system of government, wherein the King of Norway is the head of
state and the Prime Minister is the head of government. Power is separated among
the legislative, executive and judicial branches of government, as defined by
the Constitution, which serves as the country's supreme legal document.

The Monarch officially retains executive power. However, following the
introduction of a parliamentary system of government, the duties of the Monarch
have since become strictly representative and ceremonial, such as the formal
appointment and dismissal of the Prime Minister and other ministers in the
executive government. Accordingly, the Monarch is commander-in-chief of the
Norwegian Armed Forces, and serves as chief diplomatic official abroad and as a
symbol of unity. Harald V of the House of
Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg was crowned King of Norway in 1991, the
first since the 14th century who has been born in the country. Haakon, Crown
Prince of Norway, is the legal and rightful heir to the throne and the Kingdom.

In practice, the Prime Minister exercises the executive powers.
Constitutionally, legislative power is vested with both the government and the
Parliament of Norway, but the latter is the supreme legislature and a unicameral
body. Norway is fundamentally structured as a representative democracy. The
Parliament can pass a law by simple majority of the 169 representatives, who are
elected on the basis of proportional representation from 19 constituencies for
four-year terms.

150 are elected directly from the 19 constituencies, and an additional 19 seats
("levelling seats") are allocated on a nationwide basis to make the
representation in parliament correspond better with the popular vote for the
political parties. A 4% election threshold is required for a party to gain
levelling seats in Parliament. There are a total of 169 Members of Parliament.

The Parliament of Norway, called the Stortinget (meaning Grand Assembly),
ratifies national treaties developed by the executive branch. It can impeach
members of the government if their acts are declared unconstitutional. If an
indicted suspect is impeached, Parliament has the power to remove the person
from office.

The position of Prime Minister, Norway's head of government, is allocated to the
Member of Parliament who can obtain the confidence of a majority in Parliament,
usually the current leader of the largest political party or, more effectively,
through a coalition of parties. A single party generally does not have
sufficient political power in terms of the number of seats to form a government
on its own. Norway has often been ruled by minority governments.

The Prime Minister nominates the Cabinet, traditionally drawn from members of
the same political party or parties in the Storting, making up the government.
The PM organises the executive government and exercises its power as vested by
the Constitution. Reflecting its monarchical past, Norway was established under
the Lutheran Church of Norway, and was the state church until 2012. Formerly the
PM had to have more than half the members of Cabinet be members of the Church of
Norway, meaning at least ten out of the 19 ministries. This rule was however
removed in 2012. The issue of separation of church and state in Norway has been
increasingly controversial, as many people believe it is time to change this, to
reflect the growing diversity in the population. A part of this is the evolution
of the public school subject Christianity, a required subject since 1739. Even
the state's loss in a battle at the European Court of Human Rights at Strasbourg
in 2007 did not settle the matter. As of January 1, 2017 the Church of Norway is
a separate legal entity and no longer a branch of the civil service.

Through the Council of State, a privy council presided over by the Monarch, the
Prime Minister and the Cabinet meet at the Royal Palace and formally consult the
Monarch. All government bills need the formal approval by the Monarch before and
after introduction to Parliament. The Council reviews and approves all of the
Monarch's actions as head of state. Although all government and parliamentary
acts are decided beforehand, the privy council is an example of symbolic gesture
the King retains.

Members of the Storting are directly elected from party-lists proportional
representation in nineteen plural-member constituencies in a national
multi-party system. Historically, both the Norwegian Labour Party and
Conservative Party have played leading political roles. In the early 21st
century, the Labour Party has been in power since the 2005 election, in a
Red-Green Coalition with the Socialist Left Party and the Centre Party.

Since 2005, both the Conservative Party and the Progress Party have won numerous
seats in the Parliament, but not sufficient in the 2009 general election to
overthrow the coalition. Commentators have pointed to the poor co-operation
between the opposition parties, including the Liberals and the Christian
Democrats. Jens Stoltenberg, the leader of the Labour Party, continues to have
the necessary majority through his multi-party alliance to continue as PM.

In national elections in September 2013, voters ended eight years of Labor rule.
Two political parties, Høyre and Fremskrittspartiet, elected on promises of tax
cuts, more spending on infrastructure and education, better services and
stricter rules on immigration, formed a government. Coming at a time when
Norway's economy is in good condition with low unemployment, the rise of the
right appeared to be based on other issues. Erna Solberg became prime minister,
the second female prime minister after Brundtland and the first conservative
prime minister since Syse. Solberg said her win was "a historic election victory
for the right-wing parties".

Norway, a unitary state, is divided into nineteen first-level administrative
counties (fylke). The counties are administrated through directly elected county
assemblies who elect the County Governor. Additionally, the King and government
are represented in every county by a fylkesmann, who effectively acts as a
Governor. As such, the Government is directly represented at a local level
through the County Governors' offices. The counties are then sub-divided into
430 second-level municipalities (kommunar), which in turn are administrated by
directly elected municipal council, headed by a mayor and a small executive
cabinet. The capital of Oslo is considered both a county and a municipality.

Norway has two integral overseas territories: Jan Mayen and Svalbard, the only
developed island in the archipelago of the same name, located miles away to the
north. There are three Antarctic and Subantarctic dependencies: Bouvet Island,
Peter I Island and Queen Maud Land. On most maps there had been an unclaimed
area between Queen Maud Land and the South Pole until June 12, 2015 when Norway
formally annexed that area.

96 settlements have city status in Norway. In most cases, the city borders are
coterminous with the borders of their respective municipalities. Often,
Norwegian city municipalities include large areas that are not developed; for
example, Oslo municipality contains large forests, located north and south-east
of the city, and over half of Bergen municipality consists of mountainous areas.

Norway uses a civil law system where laws are created and amended in Parliament
and the system regulated through the Courts of justice of Norway. It consists of
the Supreme Court of 20 permanent judges and a Chief Justice, appellate courts,
city and district courts, and conciliation councils. The judiciary is
independent of executive and legislative branches. While the Prime Minister
nominates Supreme Court Justices for office, their nomination must be approved
by Parliament and formally confirmed by the Monarch in the Council of State.
Usually, judges attached to regular courts are formally appointed by the Monarch
on the advice of the Prime Minister.

The Courts' strict and formal mission is to regulate the Norwegian judicial
system, interpret the Constitution, and as such implement the legislation
adopted by Parliament. In its judicial reviews, it monitors the legislative and
executive branches to ensure that they comply with provisions of enacted
legislation.

The law is enforced in Norway by the Norwegian Police Service. It is a Unified
National Police Service made up of 27 Police Districts and several specialist
agencies, such as Norwegian National Authority for the Investigation and
Prosecution of Economic and Environmental Crime, known as Økokrim; and the
National Criminal Investigation Service, known as Kripos, each headed by a chief
of police. The Police Service is headed by the National Police Directorate,
which reports to the Ministry of Justice and the Police. The Police Directorate
is headed by a National Police Commissioner. The only exception is the Norwegian
Police Security Agency, whose head answers directly to the Ministry of Justice
and the Police.

Norway abolished the death penalty for regular criminal acts in 1902. The
legislature abolished the death penalty for high treason in war and war-crimes
in 1979. Reporters Without Borders, in its 2007 Worldwide Press Freedom Index,
ranked Norway at a shared first place (along with Iceland) out of 169 countries.

In general, the legal and institutional framework in Norway is characterised by
a high degree of transparency, accountability and integrity, and the perception
and the occurrence of corruption are very low. Norway has ratified all relevant
international anti-corruption conventions, and its standards of implementation
and enforcement of anti-corruption legislation are considered very high by many
international anti-corruption working groups such as the OECD Anti-Bribery
Working Group. However, there are some isolated cases showing that some
municipalities have abused their position in public procurement processes.

Norwegian prisons are humane rather than tough with emphasis on rehabilitation.
At 20% Norway's reconviction rate is among the lowest in the world.

Norway maintains embassies in 86 countries. 60 countries maintain an embassy in
Norway, all of them in the capital, Oslo.

Norway is a founding member of the United Nations (UN), the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), the Council of Europe and the European Free Trade
Association (EFTA). Norway issued applications for accession to the European
Union (EU) and its predecessors in 1962, 1967 and 1992, respectively. While
Denmark, Sweden and Finland obtained membership, the Norwegian electorate
rejected the treaties of accession in referenda in 1972 and 1994.

After the 1994 referendum, Norway maintained its membership in the European
Economic Area (EEA), an arrangement granting the country access to the internal
market of the Union, on the condition that Norway implements the Union's pieces
of legislation which are deemed relevant (of which there were approximately
seven thousand by 2010) Successive Norwegian governments have, since 1994,
requested participation in parts of the EU's co-operation that go beyond the
provisions of the EEA agreement. Non-voting participation by Norway has been
granted in, for instance, the Union's Common Security and Defence Policy, the
Schengen Agreement, and the European Defence Agency, as well as 19 separate
programmes.

Norway contributes to international development. In addition, it participated in
the 1990s brokering of the Oslo Accords, an attempt to resolve the
Israeli–Palestinian conflict. These were unsuccessful.

The Norwegian Armed Forces numbers about 25,000 personnel, including civilian
employees. According to 2009 mobilisation plans, full mobilisation produces
approximately 83,000 combatant personnel. Norway has conscription (including
6–12 months of training); in 2013, the country became the first in Europe and
NATO to draft women as well as men. However, due to less need for conscripts
after the Cold War ended with the break-up of the Soviet Union, few people have
to serve if they are not motivated. The Armed Forces are subordinate to the
Norwegian Ministry of Defence. The Commander-in-Chief is King Harald V. The
military of Norway is divided into the following branches: the Norwegian Army,
the Royal Norwegian Navy, the Royal Norwegian Air Force, the Norwegian Cyber
Force and the Home Guard.

In response to its being overrun by Germany in 1940, the country was one of the
founding nations of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on 4 April
1949. At present, Norway contributes in the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan. Additionally, Norway has contributed in several
missions in contexts of the United Nations, NATO, and the Common Security and
Defence Policy of the European Union.

Norway was awarded first place according to the UN's Human Development Index
(HDI) for 2013. Poverty and communicable diseases dominated in Norway together
with famines, and epidemics in the 1800s. From the 1900s improvements in public
health occurred as a result of development in several areas such as social and
living conditions, changes in disease and medical outbreaks, establishment of
the health care system and emphasis on public health matters. Vaccination and
increased treatment opportunities with antibiotics resulted in great
improvements within the Norwegian population. Improved hygiene and better
nutrition were factors that contributed to improved health.

The disease pattern in Norway changed from communicable diseases to
non-communicable diseases and chronic diseases as cardiovascular disease.
Inequalities and social differences are still present in public health in Norway
today.

In 2013 the infant mortality rate was 2.5 per 1,000 live births among children
under the age of one. For girls it was 2.7 and for boys 2.3, which is the lowest
infant mortality rate for boys ever recorded in Norway.

Norwegians enjoy the second-highest GDP per-capita among European countries
(after Luxembourg), and the sixth-highest GDP (PPP) per-capita in the world.
Today, Norway ranks as the second-wealthiest country in the world in monetary
value, with the largest capital reserve per capita of any nation. According to
the CIA World Factbook, Norway is a net external creditor of debt. Norway
maintained first place in the world in the UNDP Human Development Index (HDI)
for six consecutive years (2001–2006), and then reclaimed this position in 2009,
through 2015. The standard of living in Norway is among the highest in the
world. Foreign Policy Magazine ranks Norway last in its Failed States Index for
2009, judging Norway to be the world's most well-functioning and stable country.
The OECD ranks Norway fourth in the 2013 equalised Better Life Index and third
in intergenerational earnings elasticity.

The Norwegian economy is an example of a mixed economy, a prosperous capitalist
welfare state and social democracy country featuring a combination of free
market activity and large state ownership in certain key sectors. Public health
care in Norway is free (after an annual charge of around $230 for those over
16), and parents have 46 weeks paid parental leave. The state income derived
from natural resources includes a significant contribution from petroleum
production. Norway has an unemployment rate of 4.8%, with 68% of the population
aged 15–74 employed. People in the labour force are either employed or looking
for work. 9.5% of the population aged 18–66 receive a disability pension and 30%
of the labour force are employed by the government, the highest in the OECD. The
hourly productivity levels, as well as average hourly wages in Norway, are among
the highest in the world.

The egalitarian values of Norwegian society have kept the wage difference
between the lowest paid worker and the CEO of most companies as much less than
in comparable western economies. This is also evident in Norway's low Gini
coefficient.

The state has large ownership positions in key industrial sectors, such as the
strategic petroleum sector (Statoil), hydroelectric energy production
(Statkraft), aluminium production (Norsk Hydro), the largest Norwegian bank
(DNB), and telecommunication provider (Telenor). Through these big companies,
the government controls approximately 30% of the stock values at the Oslo Stock
Exchange. When non-listed companies are included, the state has even higher
share in ownership (mainly from direct oil licence ownership). Norway is a major
shipping nation and has the world's 6th largest merchant fleet, with 1,412
Norwegian-owned merchant vessels.

By referendums in 1972 and 1994, Norwegians rejected proposals to join the
European Union (EU). However, Norway, together with Iceland and Liechtenstein,
participates in the European Union's single market through the European Economic
Area (EEA) agreement. The EEA Treaty between the European Union countries and
the EFTA countries– transposed into Norwegian law via "EØS-loven"– describes the
procedures for implementing European Union rules in Norway and the other EFTA
countries. Norway is a highly integrated member of most sectors of the EU
internal market. Some sectors, such as agriculture, oil and fish, are not wholly
covered by the EEA Treaty. Norway has also acceded to the Schengen Agreement and
several other intergovernmental agreements among the EU member states.

The country is richly endowed with natural resources including petroleum,
hydropower, fish, forests, and minerals. Large reserves of petroleum and natural
gas were discovered in the 1960s, which led to a boom in the economy. Norway has
obtained one of the highest standards of living in the world in part by having a
large amount of natural resources compared to the size of the population. In
2011, 28% of state revenues were generated from the petroleum industry.

Norway is the first country which banned cutting of trees (deforestation), in
order to prevent rain forests from vanishing. The country declared its intention
at the UN Climate Summit in 2014, alongside Great Britain and Germany. Crops,
that are typically linked to forests' destruction are timber, soy, palm oil and
beef. Now Norway has to find new way to provide these essential products without
exerting negative influence on its environment.

Export revenues from oil and gas have risen to almost 50% of total exports and
constitute more than 20% of the GDP. Norway is the fifth-largest oil exporter
and third-largest gas exporter in the world, but it is not a member of OPEC. In
1995 the Norwegian government established the sovereign wealth fund ("Government
Pension Fund — Global"), which would be funded with oil revenues, including
taxes, dividends, sales revenues and licensing fees. This was intended to reduce
overheating in the economy from oil revenues, minimise uncertainty from
volatility in oil price, and provide a cushion to compensate for expenses
associated with the ageing of the population.

The government controls its petroleum resources through a combination of state
ownership in major operators in the oil fields (with approximately 62% ownership
in Statoil in 2007) and the fully state-owned Petoro, which has a market value
of about twice Statoil, and SDFI. Finally, the government controls licensing of
exploration and production of fields. The fund invests in developed financial
markets outside Norway. The budgetary rule (Handlingsregelen) is to spend no
more than 4% of the fund each year (assumed to be the normal yield from the
fund).

In August 2014, the Government Pension Fund controlled assets were valued at
approximately US$884 billion (equal to US$173,000 per capita) which is about
174% of Norway's current GDP. It is the largest sovereign wealth fund in the
world. The fund controls about 1.3% of all listed shares in Europe and more than
1% of all the publicly traded shares in the world. The Norwegian Central Bank
operates investment offices in London, New York and Shanghai. Guidelines
implemented in 2007 allow the fund to invest up to 60% of the capital in shares
(maximum of 40% prior), while the rest may be placed in bonds and real-estate.
As the stock markets tumbled in September 2008, the fund was able to buy more
shares at low prices. In this way, the losses incurred by the market turmoil was
recuperated by November 2009.[citation needed]

Other nations with economies based on natural resources, such as Russia, are
trying to learn from Norway by establishing similar funds. The investment
choices of the Norwegian fund are directed by ethical guidelines; for example,
the fund is not allowed to invest in companies that produce parts for nuclear
weapons. Norway's highly transparent investment scheme is lauded by the
international community.[citation needed] The future size of the fund is closely
linked to the price of oil and to developments in international financial
markets.

In 2000, the government sold one-third of the state-owned oil company Statoil in
an IPO. The next year, the main telecom supplier, Telenor, was listed on Oslo
Stock Exchange. The state also owns significant shares of Norway's largest bank,
DnB NOR and the airline SAS. Since 2000, economic growth has been rapid, pushing
unemployment down to levels not seen since the early 1980s (unemployment in
2007: 1.3%). The international financial crisis has primarily affected the
industrial sector, but unemployment has remained low and was at 3.3% (86,000
people) in August 2011. In contrast to Norway, Sweden had substantially higher
actual and projected unemployment numbers as a result of the recession.
Thousands of mainly young Swedes migrated to Norway for work during these years,
which is easy as the labour market and social security systems overlap in the
Nordic Countries. In the 1st quarter of 2009, the GNP of Norway surpassed
Sweden's for the first time in history, although its population is half the
size.

Norway contains significant mineral resources and in 2013 its mineral production
was valued at US$1.5 billion (Norwegian Geological Survey data). The most
valuable minerals are calcium carbonate (limestone), building stone, nepheline
syenite, olivine, iron, titanium, and nickel.

Norway is also the world's 2nd-largest exporter of fish (in value, after China).
Hydroelectric plants generate roughly 98–99% of Norway's electric power, more
than any other country in the world.

Between 1966 and 2013, Norwegian companies drilled 5085 oil wells, mostly in the
North Sea. 3672 are utviklingsbrønner (regular production); 1413 are letebrønner
(exploration); and 1405 of these have been terminated (avsluttet).

Oil fields not yet in production phase include: Wisting Central—calculated size
in 2013, 65–156 million barrels of oil and 10 to 40 billion cubic feet (0.28 to
1.13 billion cubic metres), (utvinnbar) of gas. and the Castberg Oil Field
(Castberg-feltet)—calculated size 540 million barrels of oil, and 2 to 7 billion
cubic feet (57 to 198 million cubic metres) (utvinnbar) of gas. Both oil fields
are located in the Barents Sea.

Due to the low population density, narrow shape and long coastlines of Norway,
its public transport is less developed than in many European countries,
especially outside the major cities. The country has longstanding water
transport traditions, but the Norwegian Ministry of Transport and Communications
has in recent years implemented rail, road and air transport through numerous
subsidiaries to develop the country's infrastructure. Under discussion is
development of a new high-speed rail system between the nation's largest cities.

Norway's main railway network consists of 4,114 kilometres (2,556 mi) of
standard gauge lines, of which 242 kilometres (150 mi) is double track and 64
kilometres (40 mi) high-speed rail (210 km/h) while 62% is electrified at 15 kV
 16 2⁄3 Hz AC. The railways transported 56,827,000 passengers 2,956 million
passenger-kilometres and 24,783,000 tonnes of cargo 3,414 million
tonne-kilometres. The entire network is owned by the Norwegian National Rail
Administration. All domestic passenger trains except the Airport Express Train
are operated by Norges Statsbaner (NSB). Several companies operate freight
trains. Investment in new infrastructure and maintenance is financed through the
state budget, and subsidies are provided for passenger train operations. NSB
operates long-haul trains, including night trains, regional services and four
commuter train systems, around Oslo, Trondheim, Bergen and Stavanger.

Norway has approximately 92,946 kilometres (57,754 mi) of road network, of which
72,033 kilometres (44,759 mi) are paved and 664 kilometres (413 mi) are
motorway. The four tiers of road routes are national, county, municipal and
private, with national and primary county roads numbered en route. The most
important national routes are part of the European route scheme. The two most
prominent are the E6 going north-south through the entire country, and the E39,
which follows the West Coast. National and county roads are managed by the
Norwegian Public Roads Administration.

Norway has the world's largest registered stock of plug-in electric vehicles per
capita, with Oslo recognised as the EV capital of the world. In March 2014,
Norway became the first country where over 1 in every 100 passenger cars on the
roads is a plug-in electric. The plug-in electric segment market share of new
car sales is also the highest in the world. According to a report by Dagens
Næringsliv in June 2016, the country would like to ban all gasoline and diesel
powered vehicles as early as 2025.

Of the 97 airports in Norway, 52 are public, and 46 are operated by the
state-owned Avinor. Seven airports have more than one million passengers
annually. 41,089,675 passengers passed through Norwegian airports in 2007, of
which 13,397,458 were international.

The central gateway to Norway by air is Oslo Airport, Gardermoen. Located about
35 kilometres (22 mi) northeast of Oslo, it is hub for the two major Norwegian
airlines: Scandinavian Airlines and Norwegian Air Shuttle, and for regional
aircraft from Western Norway. There are departures to most European countries
and some intercontinental destinations. A direct high-speed train connects to
Oslo Central Station every 10 minutes for a 20 min ride.

Norway's population was 5,096,300 people in October 2013. Norwegians are an
ethnic North Germanic people. Since the late 20th century, Norway has attracted
immigrants from southern and central Europe, the Mideast, Africa, Asia and
beyond.

In 2012, an official study showed that 86% of the total population have at least
one parent who was born in Norway. More than 710,000 individuals (14%) are
immigrants and their descendants; there are 117,000 children of immigrants, born
in Norway.

In 2013, the Norwegian government said that 14% of the Norwegian population were
immigrants or children of two immigrant parents. About 6% of the immigrant
population come from EU, North America and Australia, and about 8.1% come from
Asia, Africa and Latin America.

In 2012, of the total 660,000 with immigrant background, 407,262 had Norwegian
citizenship (62.2%).

Immigrants have settled in all Norwegian municipalities. The cities or
municipalities with the highest share of immigrants in 2012 were Oslo (32%) and
Drammen (27%). The share in Stavanger was 16%. According to Reuters, Oslo is the
"fastest growing city in Europe because of increased immigration". In recent
years, immigration has accounted for most of Norway's population growth. In 2011
16% of newborn children were of immigrant background.

The Sami people are indigenous to the Far North and have traditionally inhabited
central and northern parts of Norway and Sweden, as well as areas in northern
Finland and in Russia on the Kola Peninsula. Another national minority are the
Kven people, descendants of Finnish-speaking people who migrated to northern
Norway from the 18th up to the 20th century. From the 19th century up to the
1970s, the Norwegian government tried to assimilate both the Sami and the Kven,
encouraging them to adopt the majority language, culture and religion. Because
of this "Norwegianization process", many families of Sami or Kven ancestry now
identify as ethnic Norwegian.

Particularly in the 19th century, when economic conditions were difficult in
Norway, tens of thousands of people migrated to the United States and Canada,
where they could work and buy land in frontier areas. Many went to the Midwest
and Pacific Northwest. In 2006, according to the US Census Bureau, almost 4.7
million persons identified as Norwegian Americans, which was larger than the
population of ethnic Norwegians in Norway itself. In the 2011 Canadian census,
452,705 Canadian citizens identified as having Norwegian ancestry.

On 1 January 2013[update], the number of immigrants or children of two
immigrants residing in Norway was 710,465, or 14.1% of the total population, up
from 183,000 in 1992. Yearly immigration has increased since 2005. While yearly
net immigration in 2001–5 was on average 13,613, it increased to 37,541 between
2006 and 2010, and in 2011 net immigration reached 47,032. This is mostly
because of increased immigration by residents of the EU, in particular from
Poland.

In 2012, the immigrant community (which includes immigrants and children born in
Norway of immigrant parents) grew by 55,300, a record high. Net immigration from
abroad reached 47,300 (300 higher than in 2011), while immigration accounted for
72% of Norway's population growth. 17% of newborn children were born to
immigrant parents. Children of Pakistani, Somali and Vietnamese parents made up
the largest groups of all Norwegians born to immigrant parents.

Pakistani Norwegians are the largest non-European minority group in Norway. Most
of their 32,700 members live in and around Oslo. The Iraqi and Somali immigrant
populations have increased significantly in recent years. After the enlargement
of the EU in 2004, a wave of immigrants has arrived from Central and Northern
Europe, particularly Poland, Sweden and Lithuania. The fastest growing immigrant
groups in 2011 in absolute numbers were from Poland, Lithuania and Sweden. The
policies of immigration and integration have been the subject of much debate in
Norway.

Most Norwegians are registered at baptism as members of the Church of Norway
which used to be the official state religion. The constitution still requires
that the reigning monarch must be Lutheran and that the country's values are
based on its Christian and humanist heritage. Many remain in the church to
participate in the community and practices such as baptism, confirmation,
marriage and burial rites. About 74.3% of Norwegians were members of the Church
of Norway in 2015. In 2014, about 59.3% of all newborns were baptised and about
62.9% of all 15-year-old persons were confirmed in the church.

In the early 1990s, studies estimated that between 4.7% and 5.3% of Norwegians
attended church on a weekly basis. This figure has dropped to about 2%.

In 2010, 10% of the population was religiously unaffiliated, while another 9%,
were members of religious communities outside the Church of Norway. Other
Christian denominations total about 4.9% of the population, the largest of which
is the Roman Catholic Church, with 83,000 members, according to 2009 government
statistics. An article in the newspaper Aftenposten in October 2012 noted there
were about 115,234 registered Roman Catholics in Norway; the reporter estimated
that the total number of people with a Roman Catholic background may be
170,000–200,000 or higher.

Others include Pentecostals (39,600), the Evangelical Lutheran Free Church of
Norway (19,600), Methodists (11,000), Baptists (9,900), Eastern Orthodox
(9,900), Brunstad Christian Church (6,800), Seventh-day Adventists (5,100),
Assyrians and Chaldeans, and others. The Swedish, Finnish and Icelandic Lutheran
congregations in Norway have about 27,500 members in total. Other Christian
denominations comprise less than 1% each, including 4,000 members in The Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and 12,000 Jehovah's Witnesses.

Among non-Christian religions, Islam is the largest, with 132,135 registered
members (2014), and probably fewer than 200,000 in total. It is practised mainly
by Somali, Arab, Bosniak, Albanian and Turkish immigrants, as well as Norwegians
of Pakistani descent.

Other religions comprise less than 1% each, including 819 adherents of Judaism.
Indian immigrants introduced Hinduism to Norway, which in 2011 has slightly more
than 5,900 adherents, or 1% of non-Lutheran Norwegians. Sikhism has
approximately 3,000 adherents, with most living in Oslo, which has two
gurdwaras. Sikhs first came to Norway in the early 1970s. The troubles in Punjab
after Operation Blue Star and riots committed against Sikhs in India after the
assassination of Indira Gandhi led to an increase in Sikh refugees moving to
Norway. Drammen also has a sizeable population of Sikhs; the largest gurdwara in
north Europe was built in Lier. There are eleven Buddhist organisations, grouped
under the Buddhistforbundet organisation, with slightly over 14,000 members,
which make up 0.2% of the population. The Baha'i religion has slightly more than
1,000 adherents. Around 1.7% (84,500) of Norwegians belong to the secular
Norwegian Humanist Association.

From 2006 to 2011, the fastest-growing religious faith in Norway was Orthodox
Christianity, which grew in membership by 80%; however, its share of the total
population remains small, at 0.2%. It is associated with the huge immigration
from Eritrea and Ethiopia, and to a lesser extent from Central and Eastern
European and Middle Eastern countries. Other fast-growing religions were the
Roman Catholic Church (78.7%), Hinduism (59.6%), Islam (48.1%), and Buddhism
(46.7%).

As in other Scandinavian countries, the ancient Norse followed a form of native
Germanic paganism known as Norse paganism. By the end of the 11th century, when
Norway had been Christianised, the indigenous Norse religion and practices were
prohibited. Remnants of the native religion and beliefs of Norway survive today
in the form of names, referential names of cities and locations, the days of the
week, and other parts of everyday language. Modern interest in the old ways has
led to a revival of pagan religious practices in the form of Åsatru. The
Norwegian Åsatrufellesskapet Bifrost formed in 1996; in 2011, the fellowship had
about 300 members. Foreningen Forn Sed was formed in 1999 and has been
recognised by the Norwegian government.

The Sami minority retained their shamanistic religion well into the 18th
century, when most converted to Christianity under the influence of
Dano-Norwegian Lutheran missionaries. Some retained their ancient
religion.[citation needed] Today there is a renewed appreciation for the Sami
traditional way of life, which has led to a revival of Noaidevuohta. Some
Norwegian and Sami celebrities are reported to visit shamans for guidance.

According to the Eurobarometer Poll 2010, 22% of Norwegian citizens responded
that "they believe there is a god". A study conducted three years previously by
Gustafsson and Pettersson (2002), similarly found that 72% of Norwegians did not
believe in a 'personal God.'

Higher education in Norway is offered by a range of seven universities, five
specialised colleges, 25 university colleges as well as a range of private
colleges. Education follows the Bologna Process involving Bachelor (3 years),
Master (2 years) and PhD (3 years) degrees. Acceptance is offered after
finishing upper secondary school with general study competence.

Public education is virtually free, regardless of nationality. The academic year
has two semesters, from August to December and from January to June. The
ultimate responsibility for the education lies with the Norwegian Ministry of
Education and Research.

The North Germanic Norwegian language has two official written forms, Bokmål and
Nynorsk. Both are used in public administration, schools, churches, and media.
Bokmål is the written language used by a large majority of about 80–85%. An
alternative to Bokmål, Riksmål, is slightly more similar to Danish. Around 95%
of the population speak Norwegian as their first or native language, although
many speak dialects that may differ significantly from the written languages.
All Norwegian dialects are mutually intelligible, although listeners with
limited exposure to dialects other than their own may struggle to understand
certain phrases and pronunciations in some other dialects.

Several Uralic Sami languages are spoken and written throughout the country,
especially in the north, by some members of the Sami people. (Estimates suggest
that about one third of the Norwegian Sami speak a Sami language.) Speakers have
a right to be educated and to receive communication from the government in their
own language in a special forvaltningsområde (administrative area) for Sami
languages. The Kven minority historically spoke the Uralic Kven language
(considered a separate language in Norway, but generally perceived as a Finnish
dialect in Finland). Today the majority of ethnic Kven have little or no
knowledge of the language. According to the Kainun institutti, "The typical
modern Kven is a Norwegian-speaking Norwegian who knows his genealogy." As
Norway has ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
(ECRML) the Kven language together with Romani and Scandoromani language has
become officially recognised minority languages.

Some supporters have also advocated making Norwegian Sign Language an official
language of the country.

In the 19th and 20th centuries, the Norwegian language was subject to strong
political and cultural controversies. This led to the development of Nynorsk in
the 19th century and to the formation of alternative spelling standards in the
20th century.

Norwegian is similar to the other languages in Scandinavia: Swedish and Danish.
All three languages are to a degree mutually intelligible and can be, and
commonly are, employed in communication among inhabitants of the Scandinavian
countries. As a result of the co-operation within the Nordic Council,
inhabitants of all Nordic countries, including Iceland and Finland, have the
right to communicate with Norwegian authorities in their own language.[citation
needed]

The primary foreign language taught in Norwegian schools is English, considered
an international language since the post-WWII era. The majority of the
population is fairly fluent in English, especially those born after World War
II. German, French and Spanish are also commonly taught as second or, more
often, third languages. Russian, Japanese, Italian, Latin, and rarely Chinese
(Mandarin) are offered in some schools, mostly in the cities. Traditionally,
English, German and French were considered the main foreign languages in Norway.
These languages, for instance, were used on Norwegian passports until the 1990s,
and university students have a general right to use these languages when
submitting their theses.

The Norwegian farm culture continues to play a role in contemporary Norwegian
culture. In the 19th century, it inspired a strong romantic nationalistic
movement, which is still visible in the Norwegian language and media. Norwegian
culture blossomed with nationalist efforts to achieve an independent identity in
the areas of literature, art and music. This continues today in the performing
arts and as a result of government support for exhibitions, cultural projects
and artwork.

Norway has been a progressive country, which has adopted legislation and
policies to support women's rights, minority rights, and LGBT rights. As early
as 1884, 171 of the leading figures, among them five Prime Ministers for the
Liberal Party and the Conservative Party, co-founded the Norwegian Association
for Women's Rights. They successfully campaigned for women's right to education,
women's suffrage, the right to work and other gender equality policies. From the
1970s, gender equality also came high on the state agenda with the establishment
of a public body to promote gender equality, which evolved into the Gender
Equality and Anti-Discrimination Ombud. Civil society organisations also
continue to play an important role, and the women's rights organisations are
today organised in the Norwegian Women's Lobby umbrella organisation.

In 1990 the Norwegian constitution was amended to grant absolute primogeniture
to the Norwegian throne, meaning that the eldest child, regardless of gender,
takes precedence in the line of succession. As it was not retroactive, the
current successor to the throne is the eldest son of the King, rather than his
eldest child. The Norwegian constitution Article 6 states that "For those born
before the year 1990 it shall...be the case that a male shall take precedence
over a female."

The Sami people have for centuries been the subject of discrimination and abuse
by the dominant cultures in Scandinavia and Russia, those countries claiming
possession of Sami lands. The Sami people have never been a single community in
a single region of Lapland. Norway has been greatly criticised by the
international community for the politics of Norwegianization of and
discrimination against the indigenous population of the country. Nevertheless,
Norway was, in 1990, the first country to recognise ILO-convention 169 on
indigenous people recommended by the UN.

In regard to LGBT rights, Norway was the first country in the world to enact an
anti-discrimination law protecting the rights of gays and lesbians. In 1993
Norway became the second country to legalise civil union partnerships for
same-sex couples, and on 1 January 2009 Norway became the sixth country to grant
full marriage equality to same-sex couples. As a promoter of human rights,
Norway has held the annual Oslo Freedom Forum conference, a gathering described
by The Economist as "on its way to becoming a human-rights equivalent of the
Davos economic forum."

Separation of church and state happened significantly later in Norway than in
most of Europe and is not yet complete. In 2012, the Norwegian parliament voted
to grant the Church of Norway greater autonomy, a decision which was confirmed
in a constitutional amendment on 21 May 2012.

The Norwegian cinema has received international recognition. The documentary
film Kon-Tiki (1950) of the expedition won an American Oscar Academy Award. In
1959, Arne Skouen's Nine Lives was nominated, but failed to win. Another notable
film is Flåklypa Grand Prix (English: Pinchcliffe Grand Prix), an animated
feature film directed by Ivo Caprino. The film was released in 1975 and is based
on characters from Norwegian cartoonist Kjell Aukrust. It is the most widely
seen Norwegian film of all time.

Nils Gaup's Pathfinder (1987), the story of the Sami, was nominated for an
Oscar. Berit Nesheim's The Other Side of Sunday was nominated for an Oscar in
1997.

Since the 1990s, the film industry has thrived, producing up to 20 feature films
each year. Particular successes were Kristin Lavransdatter, based on a novel by
a Nobel Prize winner; The Telegraphist and Gurin with the Foxtail. Knut Erik
Jensen was among the more successful new directors, together with Erik
Skjoldbjærg, who is remembered for Insomnia.

The country has also been used as filming location for several Hollywood and
other international productions, including The Empire Strikes Back (1980), for
which the producers used Hardangerjøkulen glacier as a filming location for
scenes of the ice planet Hoth. It included a memorable battle in the snow. The
films Die Another Day, The Golden Compass, Spies Like Us and Heroes of Telemark,
as well as the TV series Lilyhammer and Vikings also had scenes set in Norway. A
short film, The Spirit of Norway was featured at Maelstrom at Norway Pavilion at
Epcot located within Walt Disney World Resort in Florida in the United States.
The attraction and the film ceased their operations on 5 October 2014.

The classical music of the romantic composers Edvard Grieg, Rikard Nordraak and
Johan Svendsen is internationally known as is the modern music of Arne Nordheim.
Norway's classical performers include Leif Ove Andsnes, one of the world's more
famous pianists; Truls Mørk, an outstanding cellist; and the great Wagnerian
soprano Kirsten Flagstad.

Norwegian black metal has been an influence in world music since the late 20th
century. Since the 1990s, Norway's export of black metal, a lo-fi, dark and raw
form of heavy metal, has been developed by such bands as Emperor, Darkthrone,
Gorgoroth, Mayhem, Burzum, and Immortal. More recently bands such as Enslaved,
Kvelertak, Dimmu Borgir and Satyricon have evolved the genre into the present
day while still garnering worldwide fans. Controversial events associated with
the black metal movement in the early 1990s included several church burnings and
two prominent murder cases.

The jazz scene in Norway is thriving. Jan Garbarek, Terje Rypdal, Mari Boine,
Arild Andersen, and Bugge Wesseltoft are internationally recognised while Paal
Nilssen-Love, Supersilent, Jaga Jazzist and Wibutee are becoming world-class
artists of the younger generation.

Norway has a strong folk music tradition which remains popular to this day.
Among the most prominent folk musicians are Hardanger fiddlers Andrea Een, Olav
Jørgen Hegge and Annbjørg Lien, and the vocalists Agnes Buen Garnås, Kirsten
Bråten Berg and Odd Nordstoga.

Other internationally recognised bands are A-ha, Röyksopp, Ylvis and Maria Mena.
A-ha initially rose to global fame during the mid-1980s. In the 1990s and 2000s
the group maintained its popularity domestically, and has remained successful
outside Norway, especially in Germany, Switzerland, France and Brazil.

In recent years, various Norwegian songwriters and production teams have
contributed to the music of other international artists. The Norwegian
production team Stargate has produced songs for Rihanna, Beyoncé, Shakira,
Jennifer Lopez and Lionel Richie, among others. Espen Lind has written and
produced songs for Beyoncé, Lionel Richie and Leona Lewis, among others. Lene
Marlin has written songs for Rihanna and Lovebugs.

Norway enjoys many music festivals throughout the year, all over the country.
Norway is the host of one of the world's biggest extreme sport festivals with
music, Ekstremsportveko—a festival held annually in Voss. Oslo is the host of
many festivals, such as Øyafestivalen and by:Larm. Oslo used to have a summer
parade similar to the German Love Parade. In 1992 the city of Oslo wanted to
adopt the French music festival Fête de la Musique. Fredrik Carl Størmer
established the festival. Even in its first year, "Musikkens Dag" gathered
thousands of people and artists in the streets of Oslo. "Musikkens Dag" is now
renamed Musikkfest Oslo.

The history of Norwegian literature starts with the pagan Eddaic poems and
skaldic verse of the 9th and 10th centuries, with poets such as Bragi Boddason
and Eyvindr skáldaspillir. The arrival of Christianity around the year 1000
brought Norway into contact with European mediaeval learning, hagiography and
history writing. Merged with native oral tradition and Icelandic influence, this
influenced the literature written in the late 12th and early 13th centuries.
Major works of that period include Historia Norwegiæ, Þiðrekssaga and Konungs
skuggsjá.

Little Norwegian literature came out of the period of the Scandinavian Union and
the subsequent Dano-Norwegian union (1387–1814), with some notable exceptions
such as Petter Dass and Ludvig Holberg. In his play Peer Gynt, Ibsen
characterised this period as "Twice two hundred years of darkness/brooded o'er
the race of monkeys." The first line of this couplet is frequently quoted.
During the union with Denmark, the government imposed using only written Danish,
which decreased the writing of Norwegian literature.

Two major events precipitated a major resurgence in Norwegian literature: in
1811 a Norwegian university was established in Christiania. Secondly, seized by
the spirit of revolution following the American and French revolutions, the
Norwegians created their first Constitution in 1814. Strong authors were
inspired who became recognised first in Scandinavia, and then worldwide; among
them were Henrik Wergeland, Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Jørgen Moe and Camilla
Collett.

By the late 19th century, in the Golden Age of Norwegian literature, the
so-called "Great Four" emerged: Henrik Ibsen, Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson, Alexander
Kielland, and Jonas Lie. Bjørnson's "peasant novels", such as Ein glad gut (A
Happy Boy) and Synnøve Solbakken, are typical of the Norwegian romantic
nationalism of their day. Kielland's novels and short stories are mostly
naturalistic. Although an important contributor to early romantic nationalism,
(especially Peer Gynt), Henrik Ibsen is better known for his pioneering
realistic dramas such as The Wild Duck and A Doll's House. They caused an uproar
because of his candid portrayals of the middle classes, complete with
infidelity, unhappy marriages, and corrupt businessmen.

In the 20th century, three Norwegian novelists were awarded the Nobel Prize in
Literature: Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson in 1903, Knut Hamsun for the book Markens
grøde ("Growth of the Soil") in 1920, and Sigrid Undset (known for
Kristinlavransdatter) in 1928. Writers such as the following also made important
contributions: Dag Solstad, Jon Fosse, Cora Sandel, Olav Duun, Olav H. Hauge,
Gunvor Hofmo, Stein Mehren, Kjell Askildsen, Hans Herbjørnsrud, Aksel Sandemose,
Bergljot Hobæk Haff, Jostein Gaarder, Erik Fosnes Hansen, Jens Bjørneboe,
Kjartan Fløgstad, Lars Saabye Christensen, Johan Borgen, Herbjørg Wassmo, Jan
Erik Vold, Rolf Jacobsen, Olaf Bull, Jan Kjærstad, Georg Johannesen, Tarjei
Vesaas, Sigurd Hoel, Arnulf Øverland, Karl Ove Knausgård and Johan Falkberget.

Internationally recognised Norwegian scientists include the mathematicians Niels
Henrik Abel, Sophus Lie and Atle Selberg, physical chemist Lars Onsager,
physicist Ivar Giaever, chemists Odd Hassel, Peter Waage, and Cato Maximilian
Guldberg.

In the 20th century, Norwegian academics have been pioneering in many social
sciences, including criminology, sociology and peace and conflict studies.
Prominent academics include Arne Næss, a philosopher and founder of deep
ecology; Johan Galtung, the founder of peace studies; Nils Christie and Thomas
Mathiesen, criminologists; Fredrik Barth, a social anthropologist; Vilhelm
Aubert, Harriet Holter and Erik Grønseth, sociologists; Tove Stang Dahl, a
pioneer of women's law; Stein Rokkan, a political scientist; and economists
Ragnar Frisch, Trygve Haavelmo, and Finn E. Kydland.

In 2014, the two Norwegian scientists May-Britt Moser and Edvard Moser won the
Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine along with John O'Keefe. They won the
prize for their groundbreaking work identifying the cells that make up a
positioning system in the human brain, our "in-built GPS".

With expansive forests, Norway has long had a tradition of building in wood.
Many of today's most interesting new buildings are made of wood, reflecting the
strong appeal that this material continues to hold for Norwegian designers and
builders.

With Norway's conversion to Christianity some 1,000 years ago, churches were
built. Stonework architecture was introduced from Europe for the most important
structures, beginning with the construction of Nidaros Cathedral in Trondheim.
In the early Middle Ages, wooden stave churches were constructed throughout
Norway. Some of them have survived; they represent Norway's most unusual
contribution to architectural history. A fine example, Urnes Stave Church in
inner Sognefjord, is on UNESCO's World Heritage List. Another notable example of
wooden architecture is the buildings at Bryggen Wharf in Bergen, also on the
list for World Cultural Heritage sites, consisting of a row of tall, narrow
wooden structures along the quayside.

In the 17th century, under the Danish monarchy, cities and villages such as
Kongsberg and Røros were established. The city[which?] had a church built in the
Baroque style. Traditional wooden buildings that were constructed in Røros have
survived.

After Norway's union with Denmark was dissolved in 1814, Oslo became the
capital. The architect Christian H. Grosch designed the earliest parts of the
University of Oslo, the Oslo Stock Exchange, and many other buildings and
churches constructed in that early national period.

At the beginning of the 20th century, the city of Ålesund was rebuilt in the Art
Nouveau style, influenced by styles of France. The 1930s, when functionalism
dominated, became a strong period for Norwegian architecture. It is only since
the late 20th century that Norwegian architects have achieved international
renown. One of the most striking modern buildings in Norway is the Sami
Parliament in Kárášjohka, designed by Stein Halvorson and Christian Sundby. Its
debating chamber, in timber, is an abstract version of a lavvo, the traditional
tent used by the nomadic Sami people.

For an extended period, the Norwegian art scene was dominated by artwork from
Germany and Holland as well as by the influence of Copenhagen. It was in the
19th century that a truly Norwegian era began, first with portraits, later with
impressive landscapes. Johan Christian Dahl (1788–1857), originally from the
Dresden school, eventually returned to paint the landscapes of western Norway,
defining Norwegian painting for the first time."

Norway's newly found independence from Denmark encouraged painters to develop
their Norwegian identity, especially with landscape painting by artists such as
Kitty Kielland, a female painter who studied under Hans Gude, and Harriet
Backer, another pioneer among female artists, influenced by impressionism. Frits
Thaulow, an impressionist, was influenced by the art scene in Paris as was
Christian Krohg, a realist painter, famous for his paintings of prostitutes.

Of particular note is Edvard Munch, a symbolist/expressionist painter who became
world-famous for The Scream which is said to represent the anxiety of modern
man.

Other artists of note include Harald Sohlberg, a neo-romantic painter remembered
for his paintings of Røros, and Odd Nerdrum, a figurative painter who maintains
that his work is not art but kitsch.

Norway's culinary traditions show the influence of long seafaring and farming
traditions with salmon (fresh and cured), herring (pickled or marinated), trout,
codfish and other seafood balanced by cheeses, dairy products and breads
(predominantly dark/darker).

Lefse is a Norwegian potato flatbread, usually topped with large amounts of
butter and sugar, most common around Christmas. Some traditional Norwegian
dishes include lutefisk, smalahove, pinnekjøtt, raspeball and fårikål.

Sports are a central part of Norwegian culture, and popular sports include
Association football, biathlon, cross-country skiing, ski jumping and, to a
lesser degree, ice hockey and handball. Norway is the most successful country in
the Winter Olympics of all time.

Association football is the most popular sport in Norway in terms of active
membership. In 2014–15 polling, football ranked far behind biathlon and
cross-country skiing in terms of popularity as spectator sports. Ice hockey is
the biggest indoor sport. The women's handball national team has won several
titles, including two Summer Olympics championships (2008, 2012), three World
Championships (1999, 2011, 2015) and six European Championship (1998, 2004,
2006, 2008, 2010, 2014).

The Norwegian national football team has participated three times in the FIFA
World Cup (1938, 1994, 1998), and once in the European Championship (2000). The
highest FIFA ranking Norway has achieved is 2nd, a position it has held twice,
in 1993 and in 1995.

Chess is also gaining popularity in Norway. Magnus Carlsen is the current world
champion. There are about 10 Grandmasters and 29 International Masters in
Norway.

Bandy is a traditional sport in Norway and the country is one of the four
founders of Federation of International Bandy. In terms of licensed athletes, it
is the second biggest winter sport in the world. As of 2017 the men's national
team has captured one silver and one bronze, while the women's national team has
managed four bronzes at the World Championships.

Norway first participated at the Olympic Games in 1900, and has sent athletes to
compete in every Games since then, except for the sparsely attended 1904 Games
and the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow when they participated in the
American-led boycott. Famous Norwegian winter sport athletes are, for instance,
biathlete Ole Einar Bjørndalen and cross country skiers Marit Bjørgen and Bjørn
Dæhlie.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Safari_(web_browser)

Safari is a web browser developed by Apple based on the WebKit engine. First
released in 2003 with Mac OS X Panther, a mobile version has been included in
iOS devices since the introduction of the iPhone in 2007. It is the default
browser on Apple devices. A Windows version, now discontinued, was available
from 2007 to 2012.

Until 1997, Apple Macintosh computers were shipped with the Netscape Navigator
and Cyberdog web browsers only. Internet Explorer for Mac was later included as
the default web browser for Mac OS 8.1 and onwards, as part of a five-year
agreement between Apple and Microsoft. During that time, Microsoft released
three major versions of Internet Explorer for Mac that were bundled with Mac OS
8 and Mac OS 9, though Apple continued to include Netscape Navigator as an
alternative. Microsoft ultimately released a Mac OS X edition of Internet
Explorer for Mac, which was included as the default browser in all Mac OS X
releases from Mac OS X DP4 up to and including Mac OS X v10.2.

On January 7, 2003, at Macworld San Francisco, Steve Jobs announced that Apple
had developed their own web browser, called Safari. It was based on Apple's
internal fork of the KHTML rendering engine, called WebKit. Apple released the
first beta version for OS X that day. A number of official and unofficial beta
versions followed, until version 1.0 was released on June 23, 2003. Initially
only available as a separate download for Mac OS X v10.2, it was included with
the Mac OS X v10.3 release on October 24, 2003 as the default browser, with
Internet Explorer for Mac included only as an alternative browser. 1.0.3,
released on August 13, 2004 was the last version to support Mac OS X v10.2,
while 1.3.2, released on January 12, 2006 was the last version to support Mac OS
X v10.3. However, 10.3 received security updates through 2007.

In April 2005, Dave Hyatt, one of the Safari developers at Apple, documented his
study by fixing specific bugs in Safari, thereby enabling it to pass the Acid2
test developed by the Web Standards Project. On April 27, 2005, he announced
that his development version of Safari now passed the test, making it the first
web browser to do so.

Safari 2.0 was released on April 29, 2005, as the only web browser included with
Mac OS X v10.4. This version was touted by Apple as possessing a 1.8x speed
boost over version 1.2.4, but did not yet include the Acid2 bug fixes. The
necessary changes were initially unavailable to end-users unless they downloaded
and compiled the WebKit source code themselves or ran one of the nightly
automated builds available at OpenDarwin.org. Apple eventually released version
2.0.2 of Safari, which included the modifications required to pass Acid2, on
October 31, 2005.

In June 2005, after some criticism from KHTML developers over lack of access to
change logs, Apple moved the development source code and bug tracking of WebCore
and JavaScriptCore to OpenDarwin.org. WebKit itself was also released as open
source. The source code for non-renderer aspects of the browser, such as its GUI
elements, remains proprietary.

The final stable version of Safari 2, Safari 2.0.4, was released on January 10,
2006 for Mac OS X. It was only available as part of Mac OS X Update 10.4.4. This
version addresses layout and CPU usage issues, among others. Safari 2.0.4 was
the last version to be released exclusively on Mac OS X until version 6 in 2012.

On January 9, 2007, at Macworld SF, Jobs announced Apple's iPhone, which would
use a mobile version of the Safari browser.

On June 11, 2007, at the Apple Worldwide Developers Conference, Jobs announced
Safari 3 for Mac OS X v10.5, Windows XP, and Windows Vista. During the
announcement, he ran a benchmark based on the iBench browser test suite
comparing the most popular Windows browsers, hence claiming that Safari was the
fastest browser. Later third-party tests of HTTP load times would support
Apple's claim that Safari 3 was indeed the fastest browser on the Windows
platform in terms of initial data loading over the Internet, though it was found
to be only negligibly faster than Internet Explorer 7 and Mozilla Firefox when
loading static content from local cache.

The initial Safari 3 beta version for Windows, released on the same day as its
announcement at WWDC 2007, had several known bugs and a zero day exploit that
allowed remote execution. The addressed bugs were then corrected by Apple three
days later on June 14, 2007, in version 3.0.1 for Windows. On June 22, 2007,
Apple released Safari 3.0.2 to address some bugs, performance issues and other
security issues. Safari 3.0.2 for Windows handles some fonts that are missing in
the browser but already installed on Windows computers, such as Tahoma,
Trebuchet MS, and others.

The iPhone was formally released on June 29, 2007. It includes a version of
Safari based on the same WebKit rendering engine as the desktop version, but
with a modified feature set better suited for a mobile device. The version
number of Safari as reported in its user agent string is 3.0, in line with the
contemporary desktop versions of Safari.

The first stable, non-beta release of Safari for Windows, Safari 3.1, was
offered as a free download on March 18, 2008. In June 2008, Apple released
version 3.1.2, addressing a security vulnerability in the Windows version where
visiting a malicious web site could force a download of executable files and
execute them on the user's desktop.

Safari 3.2, released on November 13, 2008, introduced anti-phishing features
using Google Safe Browsing and Extended Validation Certificate support. The
final version of Safari 3 is 3.2.3, released on May 12, 2009.

On June 2, 2008, the WebKit development team announced SquirrelFish, a new
JavaScript engine that vastly improves Safari's speed at interpreting scripts.
The engine is one of the new features in Safari 4, released to developers on
June 11, 2008. The new JavaScript engine quickly evolved into SquirrelFish
Extreme, featuring even further improved performance over SquirrelFish, and was
eventually marketed as Nitro. A public beta of Safari 4 was released on February
24, 2009, with new features such as the Top Sites tool (similar to Opera's Speed
Dial feature), which displays the user's most visited sites on a 3D wall. Cover
Flow, a feature of Mac OS X and iTunes, was also implemented in Safari. In the
public beta versions, tabs were placed in the title bar of the window, similar
to Google Chrome. The tab bar was moved back to its original location, below the
URL bar, in the final release. The Windows version adopted a native Windows
theme, rather than the previously employed Mac OS X-style interface. Also Apple
removed the blue progress bar located in the address bar (later reinstated in
Safari 5). Safari 4.0.1 was released for Mac on June 17 and fixed problems with
Faces in iPhoto '09. Safari 4 in Mac OS X v10.6 "Snow Leopard" has 64-bit
support, which can make JavaScript loading up to 50% faster. It also has
built-in crash resistance unique to Snow Leopard; crash resistance will keep the
browser intact if a plug-in like Flash player crashes, such that the other tabs
or windows will be unaffected. Safari 4.0.4, released on November 11, 2009 for
both OS X and Windows, further improves JavaScript performance.

Safari was one of the twelve browsers offered to EU users of Microsoft Windows
in 2010. It was one of the five browsers displayed on the first page of browser
choices along with Chrome, Firefox, Internet Explorer and Opera.

Apple released Safari 5 on June 7, 2010, featuring the new Safari Reader for
reading articles on the web without distraction (based on Arc90's Readability
tool), and a 30 percent JavaScript performance increase over Safari 4. Safari 5
includes improved developer tools and supports more than a dozen new HTML5
technologies, focused on interoperability. With Safari 5, developers can now
create secure Safari Extensions to customize and enhance the browsing
experience. Apple also re-added the progress bar behind the address bar in this
release. Safari 5.0.1 enabled the Extensions PrefPane by default; previously,
users had to enable it via the Debug menu.

Apple also released Safari 4.1 concurrently with Safari 5, exclusively for Mac
OS X Tiger. The update included the majority of the features and security
enhancements found in Safari 5. It did not, however, include Safari Reader or
Safari Extensions. Together with Mac OS X 10.7 Lion, Apple released Safari 5.1
for both Windows and Mac on July 20, 2011, with the new function 'Reading List'
and a faster browsing experience. Apple simultaneously released Safari 5.0.6 for
Mac OS X 10.5 Leopard, excluding Leopard users from the new functions in Safari
5.1.

Safari 6.0 was previously known as Safari 5.2 until Apple announced the change
at WWDC 2012. The stable release of Safari 6 coincided with the release of OS X
Mountain Lion on July 25, 2012, and is integrated into the OS. As Apple
integrated it with Mountain Lion, it is no longer available for download from
the Apple website or other sources. Apple released Safari 6 via Software Update
for users of OS X Lion. It has not been released for OS X versions prior to Lion
or for Windows. Regarding the unavailability of Safari 6 on Windows, Apple has
stated "Safari 6 is available for Mountain Lion and Lion. Safari 5 continues to
be available for Windows." Microsoft removed Safari from its BrowserChoice page.

On June 11, 2012, Apple released a developer preview of Safari 6.0 with a
feature called iCloud Tabs, which allows users to 'sync' their open tabs with
any iOS or other OS X device running the latest software. Safari 6 also included
new privacy features, including an "Ask websites not to track me" preference,
and the ability for websites to send OS X 10.8 Mountain Lion users
notifications, although it removed RSS support. Safari 6 has the Share Sheets
capability in OS X Mountain Lion. The Share Sheet options are: Add to Reading
List, Add Bookmark, Email this Page, Message, Twitter and Facebook. Users can
now see tabs with full page previews available.

Safari 6 introduced the following features, many of which are only available on
OS X 10.8 Mountain Lion:

Announced at Apple's Worldwide Developer Conference (WWDC) on June 10, 2013, the
Safari 7/6.1 developer preview brought improvements in JavaScript performance
and memory usage, as well as a new look for Top Sites and the Sidebar, and a new
Shared Links feature. Additionally, a new Power Saver feature pauses Plugins
which are not in use. Safari 7 for OS X Mavericks and Safari 6.1 (for Lion and
Mountain Lion) were released along with OS X Mavericks in an Apple special event
on October 22, 2013.

Safari 8 was announced at WWDC 2014 and released with OS X Yosemite. It included
WebGL support, stronger privacy features, increased speed and efficiency,
enhanced iCloud integration, and updated design.

Safari 9 was announced at WWDC 2015 and released with OS X El Capitan. It
included muting tabs and pinned tabs.

Safari Technology Preview was released alongside OS X El Capitan 10.11.4 as a
public beta program, where users can install it on a Mac to experience the
latest WebKit technologies, with a view to be incorporated in future stable
releases of Safari.

On OS X, Safari is a Cocoa application. It uses Apple's WebKit for rendering web
pages and running JavaScript. WebKit consists of WebCore (based on Konqueror's
KHTML engine) and JavaScriptCore (originally based on KDE's JavaScript engine,
named KJS). Like KHTML and KJS, WebCore and JavaScriptCore are free software and
are released under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License. Some
Apple improvements to the KHTML code are merged back into the Konqueror project.
Apple also releases additional code under an open source 2-clause BSD-like
license.

Until Safari 6.0, it included a built-in web feed aggregator that supported the
RSS and Atom standards. Current features include Private Browsing (a mode in
which no record of information about the user's web activity is retained by the
browser), an "Ask websites not to track me" privacy setting, the ability to
archive web content in WebArchive format, the ability to email complete web
pages directly from a browser menu, the ability to search bookmarks, and the
ability to share tabs between all Mac and iOS devices running appropriate
versions of software via an iCloud account.

WebKit2 is a multiprocess API for WebKit, where the web-content is handled by a
separate process than the application using WebKit. Apple announced WebKit2 in
April 2010. Safari for OS X switched to the new API with version 5.1. Safari for
iOS switched to WebKit2 with iOS 8.

The license has common terms against reverse engineering, copying and
sub-licensing, except parts that are open source, and it disclaims warranties
and liability.

Apple tracks use of the browser. Windows users may not opt out of tracking,
since their license omits the opening If clause. Other users may opt out, and
all users can opt out of location tracking by not using location services. "If
you choose to allow diagnostic and usage collection, you agree that Apple and
its subsidiaries and agents may collect... usage and related information... to
provide ... services to you (if any) related to the Apple Software... in a form
that does not personally identify you... Apple may also provide any such partner
or third party developer with a subset of diagnostic information that is
relevant to that partner’s or developer’s software... Apple and its partners,
licensees, third party developers and website may transmit, collect, maintain,
process and use your location data... and location search queries... in a form
that does not personally identify you ... You may withdraw this consent at any
time..."

Apple thinks "personal" does not cover "unique device identifiers" such as
serial number, cookie number, or IP address, so they use these where allowed by
law. "We may collect, use, transfer, and disclose non-personal information for
any purpose. The following are some examples of non-personal information that we
collect ... unique device identifier... We treat information collected by
cookies and other technologies as non‑personal information. However, to the
extent that Internet Protocol (IP) addresses or similar identifiers are
considered personal information by local law, we also treat these identifiers as
personal information."

In the PWN2OWN contest at the 2008 CanSecWest security conference in Vancouver,
British Columbia, an exploit of Safari caused Mac OS X to be the first OS to
fall in a hacking competition. Participants competed to find a way to read the
contents of a file located on the user's desktop in one of three operating
systems: Mac OS X Leopard, Windows Vista SP1, and Ubuntu 7.10. On the second day
of the contest, when users were allowed to physically interact with the
computers (the prior day permitted only network attacks), Charlie Miller
compromised Mac OS X through an unpatched vulnerability of the PCRE library used
by Safari. Miller was aware of the flaw before the conference and worked to
exploit it unannounced, as is the common approach in these contests. The
exploited vulnerability and other flaws were patched in Safari 3.1.1.

In the 2009 PWN2OWN contest, Charlie Miller performed another exploit of Safari
to hack into a Mac. Miller again acknowledged that he knew about the security
flaw before the competition and had done considerable research and preparation
work on the exploit. Apple released a patch for this exploit and others on May
12, 2009 with Safari 3.2.3.

Safari 6.0 requires a Mac running Mac OS X v10.7.4 or later. Safari 5.1.7
requires a Mac running Mac OS X v10.6.8 or any PC running Windows XP Service
Pack 2 or later, Windows Vista, or Windows 7. Safari 5.0.6 requires a Mac
running on Mac OS X 10.5.8.

The version of Safari included in Mac OS X v10.6 (and later versions) is
compiled for 64-bit architecture. Apple claims that running Safari in 64-bit
mode will increase rendering speeds by up to 50%.

On the 64-bit iPhones, iOS and its stock apps are 64-bit builds including
Safari.

An earlier version of Apple Software Update (bundled with Safari, QuickTime, and
iTunes for Microsoft Windows) selected Safari for installation from a list of
Apple programs to download by default, even when a pre-existing installation of
Safari was not detected on a user's machine. John Lilly, former CEO of Mozilla,
stated that Apple's use of its updating software to promote its other products
was "a bad practice and should stop." He argued that the practice "borders on
malware distribution practices" and "undermines the trust that we're all trying
to build with users." Apple spokesman Bill Evans sidestepped Lilly's statement,
saying that Apple was only "using Software Update to make it easy and convenient
for both Mac and Windows users to get the latest Safari update from Apple."
Apple also released a new version of Apple Software Update that puts new
software in its own section, though still selected for installation by default.
By late 2008, Apple Software Update no longer selected new installation items in
the new software section by default.[citation needed]

Software security firm Sophos detailed how Snow Leopard and Windows users were
not supported by the Safari 6 release at the time, while there were over 121
vulnerabilities left unpatched on those platforms. Since then, Snow Leopard has
had only three minor version releases (the most recent in September 2013), and
Windows has had none. While no official word has been released by Apple, the
indication is that these are the final versions available for these operating
systems, and both retain significant security issues.

While Safari pioneered several now standard HTML5 features (such as the Canvas
API) in its early years, it has increasingly come under attack for failing to
keep pace with modern web standards. This, coupled with Apple's policy of not
allowing third party browser engines under iOS has been viewed as stifling the
web experience on Apple devices. This is also the subject of an ongoing lawsuit
in France.

The Safari Developer Program was a free program for writers of extensions and
HTML5 websites. It allowed members to develop extensions for Apple's Safari web
browser. Since WWDC 2015 it is part of the unified Apple Developer Program,
which costs $99 a year.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amazon.com

Amazon.com (/ˈæməzɒn/ or /ˈæməzən/), also called Amazon, is an American
electronic commerce and cloud computing company that was founded on July 5,
1994, by Jeff Bezos and is based in Seattle, Washington. It is the largest
Internet-based retailer in the world by total sales and market capitalization.
Amazon.com started as an online bookstore, later diversifying to sell DVDs,
Blu-rays, CDs, video downloads/streaming, MP3 downloads/streaming, audiobook
downloads/streaming, software, video games, electronics, apparel, furniture,
food, toys and jewelry. The company also produces consumer electronics—notably,
Kindle e-readers, Fire tablets, Fire TV and the Echo—and is the world's largest
provider of cloud infrastructure services (IaaS and PaaS). Amazon also sells
certain low-end products like USB cables under its in-house brand AmazonBasics.

Amazon has separate retail websites for the United States, the United Kingdom
and Ireland, France, Canada, Germany, Italy, Spain, Netherlands, Australia,
Brazil, Japan, China, India and Mexico. Amazon also offers international
shipping to certain other countries for some of its products. In 2016, Dutch,
Polish and Turkish language versions of the German Amazon website were launched.

In 2015, Amazon surpassed Walmart as the most valuable retailer in the United
States by market capitalization, and was in the third quarter of 2016 the fourth
most valuable public company.

The company was founded in 1994, spurred by what Amazon founder Jeff Bezos
called his "regret minimization framework," which described his efforts to fend
off any regrets for not participating sooner in the Internet business boom
during that time. In 1994, Bezos left his employment as vice-president of D. E.
Shaw & Co., a Wall Street firm and moved to Seattle. He began to work on a
business plan for what would eventually become Amazon.com.

Bezos incorporated the company as "Cadabra" on July 5, 1994. Bezos changed the
name to Amazon a year later after a lawyer misheard its original name as
"cadaver". In September 1994, Bezos purchased the URL Relentless.com and briefly
considered naming his online store Relentless, but friends told him the name
sounded a bit sinister. The domain is still owned by Bezos and still redirects
to the retailer. The company went online as Amazon.com in 1995.

Bezos selected the name Amazon by looking through the dictionary and settled on
"Amazon" because it was a place that was "exotic and different" just as he
envisioned for his Internet enterprise; the Amazon river, he noted was by far
the "biggest" river in the world and he planned to make his store the biggest in
the world. Bezos placed a premium on his head start in building a brand, telling
a reporter, "There's nothing about our model that can't be copied over time. But
you know, McDonald's got copied. And it still built a huge, multibillion-dollar
company. A lot of it comes down to the brand name. Brand names are more
important online than they are in the physical world." Additionally, a name
beginning with "A" was preferential due to the probability it would occur at the
top of any list that was alphabetized.

Since June 19, 2000, Amazon's logotype has featured a curved arrow leading from
A to Z, representing that the company carries every product from A to Z, with
the arrow shaped like a smile.

After reading a report about the future of the Internet that projected annual
Web commerce growth at 2,300%, Bezos created a list of 20 products that could be
marketed online. He narrowed the list to what he felt were the five most
promising products, which included: compact discs, computer hardware, computer
software, videos and books. Bezos finally decided that his new business would
sell books online, due to the large worldwide demand for literature, the low
price points for books, along with the huge number of titles available in print.
Amazon was founded in the garage of Bezos' home in Bellevue, Washington.

The company began as an online bookstore, an idea spurred off with discussion
with John Ingram of Ingram Book (now called Ingram Content Group), along with
Keyur Patel who still holds a stake in Amazon. Amazon was able to access books
at wholesale from Ingram. In the first two months of business, Amazon sold to
all 50 states and over 45 countries. Within two months, Amazon's sales were up
to $20,000/week. While the largest brick and mortar bookstores and mail order
catalogs might offer 200,000 titles, an online bookstore could "carry" several
times more, since it would have a practically unlimited virtual (not actual)
warehouse: those of the actual product makers/suppliers.

Amazon was incorporated in 1994, in the state of Washington. In July 1995, the
company began service and sold its first book on Amazon.com: Douglas
Hofstadter's Fluid Concepts and Creative Analogies: Computer Models of the
Fundamental Mechanisms of Thought. In October 1995, the company announced itself
to the public. In 1996, it was reincorporated in Delaware. Amazon issued its
initial public offering of stock on May 15, 1997, trading under the NASDAQ stock
exchange symbol AMZN, at a price of US$18.00 per share ($1.50 after three stock
splits in the late 1990s).

Amazon's initial business plan was unusual; it did not expect to make a profit
for four to five years. This "slow" growth caused stockholders to complain about
the company not reaching profitability fast enough to justify investing in, or
to even survive in the long-term. When the dot-com bubble burst at the start of
the 21st century, destroying many e-companies in the process, Amazon survived
and grew on past the bubble burst to become a huge player in online sales. It
finally turned its first profit in the fourth quarter of 2001: $5 million (i.e.,
1¢ per share), on revenues of more than $1 billion. This profit margin, though
extremely modest, proved to skeptics that Bezos' unconventional business model
could succeed. In 1999, Time magazine named Bezos the Person of the Year,
recognizing the company's success in popularizing online shopping.

Barnes & Noble sued Amazon on May 12, 1997, alleging that Amazon's claim to be
"the world's largest bookstore" was false because it "...isn't a bookstore at
all. It's a book broker." The suit was later settled out of court and Amazon
continued to make the same claim. Walmart sued Amazon on October 16, 1998,
alleging that Amazon had stolen Walmart's trade secrets by hiring former Walmart
executives. Although this suit was also settled out of court, it caused Amazon
to implement internal restrictions and the reassignment of the former Walmart
executives.

On October 11, 2016, Amazon announced plans to build convenience stores and
develop curbside pickup locations for food. In December 2016, the Amazon Go
store was opened to Amazon employees in Seattle. The store uses a variety of
sensors and automatically charges a shopper's Amazon account as they walk out of
the store, therefore there are no checkout lines. The store is planned to open
for the general public in early 2017.

In 2011, Amazon had 30,000 full-time employees in the USA and by the end of
2016, it had 180,000 employees. The company employs 306,800 people worldwide in
full and part-time jobs.

Amazon owns over 40 subsidiaries, including Zappos, Shopbop, Diapers.com, Kiva
Systems, Goodreads, Teachstreet and IMDb.

Until June 30, 2006, typing ToysRUs.com into a browser would bring up
Amazon.com's "Toys & Games" tab; however, this relationship was terminated due
to a lawsuit. Amazon also hosted and managed the website for Borders bookstores
but this ceased in 2008. From 2001 until August 2011, Amazon hosted the retail
website for Target.

Amazon.com operates retail websites for Sears Canada, bebe Stores, Marks &
Spencer, Mothercare and Lacoste. For a growing number of enterprise clients,
including the UK merchants Marks & Spencer, Benefit Cosmetics' UK entity,
edeals.com and Mothercare, Amazon provides a unified multichannel platform where
a customer can interact with the retail website, standalone in-store terminals,
or phone-based customer service agents. Amazon Web Services also powers AOL's
Shop@AOL.

On October 18, 2011, Amazon.com announced a partnership with DC Comics for the
exclusive digital rights to many popular comics, including Superman, Batman,
Green Lantern, The Sandman and Watchmen. The partnership has caused well-known
bookstores like Barnes & Noble to remove these titles from their shelves.

On November 2013, Amazon.com announced a partnership with the United States
Postal Service to begin delivering orders on Sundays. The service, included in
Amazon’s standard shipping rates, initiated in metropolitan areas of Los Angeles
and New York due to the high-volume and inability to deliver timely, with plans
to expand into Dallas, Houston, New Orleans and Phoenix by 2014.

On July 2016, Amazon.com announced a partnership with the U.K. Civil Aviation
Authority to test some of the technologies and may use delivery service via
prime air drone in the future.

Amazon.com's product lines available at its website include several media
(books, DVDs, music CDs, videotapes and software), apparel, baby products,
consumer electronics, beauty products, gourmet food, groceries, health and
personal-care items, industrial & scientific supplies, kitchen items, jewelry,
watches, lawn and garden items, musical instruments, sporting goods, tools,
automotive items and toys & games.

Amazon Maritime, Inc. holds a Federal Maritime Commission licence to operate as
a non-vessel owning common carrier (NVOCC), which enables the company to manage
its own shipments from China into the United States.

Audible.com is a seller and producer of spoken audio entertainment, information
and educational programming on the Internet. Audible sells digital audiobooks,
radio and TV programs and audio versions of magazines and newspapers. Through
its production arm, Audible Studios, Audible has also become the world's largest
producer of downloadable audiobooks. On January 31, 2008, Amazon announced it
would buy Audible for about $300 million. The deal closed in March 2008 and
Audible became a subsidiary of Amazon.

Brilliance Audio is an audiobook publisher founded in 1984 by Michael Snodgrass
in Grand Haven, Michigan. The company produced its first 8 audio titles in 1985.
The company was purchased by Amazon in 2007 for an undisclosed amount. At the
time of the acquisition Brilliance was producing 12-15 new titles a month. It
operates as an independent company within Amazon.

In 1984, Brilliance Audio invented a technique for recording twice as much on
the same cassette. The technique involved recording on each of the two channels
of each stereo track. It has been credited with revolutionizing the burgeoning
audiobook market in the mid-1980s since it made unabridged books affordable.

ComiXology is a cloud-based digital comics platform with over 200 million comic
downloads as of September 2013. It offers a selection of more than 40,000 comic
books and graphic novels across Android, iOS, Fire OS and Windows 8 devices and
over a web browser. Amazon bought the company in April 2014.

Goodreads is a "social cataloging" website founded in December 2006 and launched
in January 2007 by Otis Chandler, a software engineer and entrepreneur and
Elizabeth Chandler. The website allows individuals to freely search Goodreads'
extensive user-populated database of books, annotations and reviews. Users can
sign up and register books to generate library catalogs and reading lists. They
can also create their own groups of book suggestions and discussions. In
December 2007, the site had over 650,000 members and over 10,000,000 books had
been added. Amazon bought the company in March 2013.

Shelfari is a social cataloging website for books. Shelfari users build virtual
bookshelves of the titles which they own or have read and they can rate, review,
tag and discuss their books. Users can also create groups that other members may
join, create discussions and talk about books, or other topics. Recommendations
can be sent to friends on the site for what books to read. Amazon bought the
company in August 2008. Shelfari continued to function as an independent book
social network within the Amazon until January 2016, when Amazon announced that
it would be merging Shelfari with Goodreads and closing down Shelfari.

Beijing Century Joyo Courier Services is a subsidiary of Amazon and it applied
for a Freight forwarding license with the US Maritime Commission. Amazon is also
building out its logistics in trucking and air freight to potentially compete
with UPS and FedEx.

The domain amazon.com attracted at least 615 million visitors annually by 2008.
Amazon attracts over 130 million customers to its US website per month by the
start of 2016. The company has also invested heavily on a massive amount of
server capacity for its website, especially to handle the excessive traffic
during the December Christmas holiday season.

Results generated by Amazon's search engine are partly determined by promotional
fees.

Amazon's localized storefronts, which differ in selection and prices, are
differentiated by top-level domain and country code:

Amazon allows users to submit reviews to the web page of each product. Reviewers
must rate the product on a rating scale from one to five stars. Amazon provides
a badging option for reviewers which indicate the real name of the reviewer
(based on confirmation of a credit card account) or which indicate that the
reviewer is one of the top reviewers by popularity. Customers may comment or
vote on the reviews, indicating whether they found a review helpful to them. If
a review is given enough "helpful" hits, it appears on the front page of the
product. In 2010, Amazon was reported as being the largest single source of
Internet consumer reviews.

When publishers asked Bezos why Amazon would publish negative reviews, he
defended the practice by claiming that Amazon.com was "taking a different
approach ... we want to make every book available—the good, the bad and the ugly
... to let truth loose".

Although reviews are attributed to the credit card name of the reviewer, there
have been cases of positive reviews being written and posted by a public
relations company on behalf of its clients, and instances of writers using
pseudonyms to leave negative reviews of their rivals' works.

Following the listing of Untouchable: The Strange Life and Tragic Death of
Michael Jackson, a disparaging biography of Michael Jackson by Randall Sullivan,
his fans, organized via social media as "Michael Jackson's Rapid Response Team
to Media Attacks", bombarded Amazon with negative reviews and negative ratings
of positive reviews.

"Search Inside the Book" is a feature which allows customers to search for
keywords in the full text of many books in the catalog. The feature started with
120,000 titles (or 33 million pages of text) on October 23, 2003. There are
about 300,000 books in the program. Amazon has cooperated with around 130
publishers to allow users to perform these searches.

Amazon derives many of its sales from third-party sellers who sell products on
Amazon (around 40% in 2008). Associates receive a commission for referring
customers to Amazon by placing links to Amazon on their websites if the referral
results in a sale. Worldwide, Amazon has "over 900,000 members" in its affiliate
programs. In the middle of 2014, the Amazon Affiliate Program is used by 1.2% of
all websites and it is the second most popular advertising network after Google
Ads. It is frequently used by websites and non-profits to provide a way for
supporters to earn them commission. Amazon reported over 1.3 million sellers
sold products through Amazon's websites in 2007. Unlike eBay, Amazon sellers do
not have to maintain separate payment accounts; all payments are handled by
Amazon.

Associates can access the Amazon catalog directly on their websites by using the
Amazon Web Services (AWS) XML service. A new affiliate product, aStore, allows
Associates to embed a subset of Amazon products within another website, or
linked to another website. In June 2010, Amazon Seller Product Suggestions was
launched (rumored to be internally called "Project Genesis") to provide more
transparency to sellers by recommending specific products to third-party sellers
to sell on Amazon. Products suggested are based on customers' browsing history.

The Amazon sales rank (ASR) provides an indication of the popularity of a
product sold on any Amazon locale. It is a relative indicator of popularity that
is updated hourly. Effectively, it is a "best sellers list" for the millions of
products stocked by Amazon. While the ASR has no direct effect on the sales of a
product, it is used by Amazon to determine which products to include in its
best-sellers lists. Products that appear in these lists enjoy additional
exposure on the Amazon website and this may lead to an increase in sales. In
particular, products that experience large jumps (up or down) in their sales
ranks may be included within Amazon's lists of "movers and shakers"; such a
listing provides additional exposure that might lead to an increase in sales.
For competitive reasons, Amazon does not release actual sales figures to the
public. However, Amazon has now begun to release point of sale data via the
Nielsen BookScan service to verified authors. While the ASR has been the source
of much speculation by publishers, manufacturers and marketers, Amazon itself
does not release the details of its sales rank calculation algorithm. Some
companies have analyzed Amazon sales data to generate sales estimates based on
the ASR, though Amazon states:

Customer Relationship Management (CRM) and Information Management (IM) support
Amazon’s business strategy. The core technology that keeps Amazon running is
Linux-based. As of 2005[update], Amazon had the world’s three largest Linux
databases, with capacities of 7.8 TB, 18.5 TB and 24.7 TB. The central data
warehouse of Amazon is made of 28 Hewlett Packard Enterprise servers with four
CPUs per node running Oracle database software. Amazon’s technology architecture
handles millions of back-end operations every day, as well as queries from more
than half a million third-party sellers. With hundreds of thousands of people
sending their credit card numbers to Amazon’s servers every day, security
becomes a major concern. Amazon employs Netscape Secure Commerce Server using
the Secure Socket Layer protocol which stores all credit card details in a
separate database. The company also records data on customer buyer behavior
which enables them to offer or recommend to an individual specific item, or
bundles of items based upon preferences demonstrated through purchases or items
visited. Amazon runs data centers for its online services and owns generators or
purchases electricity corresponding to its consumption, mostly renewable energy.
The US Navy has stated that its Relocatable Radar remains operable regardless of
an Amazon wind farm.

On January 31, 2013 Amazon experienced an outage that lasted approximately 49
minutes, leaving its site inaccessible to some customers.

On May 5, 2014 Amazon unveiled a partnership with Twitter. Twitter users can
link their accounts to an Amazon account and automatically add items to their
shopping carts by responding to any tweet with an Amazon product link bearing
the hashtag #AmazonCart. This allows customers to never leave their Twitter feed
and the product is waiting for them when they go to the Amazon website.

Amazon employs a multi-level e-commerce strategy. Amazon started off by focusing
on Business-to-Consumer relationships between itself and its customers and
Business-to-Business relationships between itself and its suppliers but it then
moved to incorporate Customer-to-Business transactions as it realized the value
of customer reviews as part of the product descriptions. It now also facilitates
customer to customer with the provision of the Amazon marketplace which act as
an intermediary to facilitate consumer to consumer transactions. The company
lets almost anyone sell almost anything using its platform. In addition to an
affiliate program that lets anybody post Amazon links and earn a commission on
click-through sales, there is now a program which lets those affiliates build
entire websites based on Amazon’s platform.

Some other large e-commerce sellers use Amazon to sell their products in
addition to selling them through their own websites. The sales are processed
through Amazon.com and end up at individual sellers for processing and order
fulfillment and Amazon leases space for these retailers. Small sellers of used
and new goods go to Amazon Marketplace to offer goods at a fixed price. Amazon
also employs the use of drop shippers or meta sellers. These are members or
entities that advertise goods on Amazon who order these goods direct from other
competing websites but usually from other Amazon members. These meta sellers may
have millions of products listed, have large transaction numbers and are grouped
alongside other less prolific members giving them credibility as just someone
who has been in business for a long time. Markup is anywhere from 50% to 100%
and sometimes more, these sellers maintain that items are in stock when the
opposite is true. As Amazon increases their dominance in the marketplace these
drop shippers have become more and more commonplace in recent years.[citation
needed]

On 2 February 2016, General Growth Properties’ CEO, Sandeep Mathrani, during a
year-end conference call with investors, analysts and reporters mentioned that
Amazon plans to roll out 300 to 400 bookstores around the country. This was an
unconfirmed comment, however, due to the source, a media frenzy ensued. In
November 2015, Amazon opened its first physical bookstore location. It is aptly
named, Amazon Books and is located in University Village in Seattle. The store
is 5,500 square feet and prices for all products match those on its website.

Over the 2000–2010 decade, Amazon has developed a customer base of around 30
million people. Amazon.com is primarily a retail site with a sales revenue
model. Amazon makes its money by taking a small percentage of the sale price of
each item that is sold through its website. Amazon also allows companies to
advertise their products by paying to be listed as featured products.

Since its founding, the company has attracted criticism and controversy from
multiple sources over its actions. These include: luring customers away from the
site's brick and mortar competitors, poor warehouse conditions for workers;
anti-unionization efforts; Amazon Kindle remote content removal; taking public
subsidies; its "1-Click patent" claims; anti-competitive actions; price
discrimination; various decisions over whether to censor or publish content such
as the WikiLeaks website; LGBT book sales rank; and works containing libel,
facilitating dogfight, cockfight, or pedophile activities. In December 2011,
Amazon faced backlash from small businesses for running a one-day deal to
promote its new Price Check app. Shoppers who used the app to check prices in a
brick-and-mortar store were offered a 5% discount to purchase the same item from
Amazon. Companies like Groupon, eBay and Taap.it countered Amazon's promotion by
offering $10 off from their products. The company has also faced accusations of
putting undue pressure on suppliers to maintain and extend its profitability.
One effort to squeeze the most vulnerable book publishers was known within the
company as the Gazelle Project, after Bezos suggested, according to Brad Stone,
"that Amazon should approach these small publishers the way a cheetah would
pursue a sickly gazelle." In July 2014 the Federal Trade Commission launched a
lawsuit against the company alleging it was promoting in-app purchases to
children, which were being transacted without parental consent.

Amazon has attracted widespread criticism by both current employees, which refer
to themselves as Amazonians, and former employees, as well as the media and
politicians for poor working conditions. In 2011 it was publicized that at the
Breinigsville, Pennsylvania warehouse, workers had to carry out work in 100 °F
(38 °C) heat, resulting in employees becoming extremely uncomfortable and
suffering from dehydration and collapse. Loading-bay doors were not opened to
allow in fresh air as "managers were worried about theft". Amazon's initial
response was to pay for an ambulance to sit outside on call to cart away
overheated employees.

Some workers, "pickers", who travel the building with a trolley and a handheld
scanner "picking" customer orders can walk up to 15 miles during their workday
and if they fall behind on their targets, they can be reprimanded. The handheld
scanners feedback to the employee real-time information on how fast or slowly
they are doing; the scanners also serve to allow Team Leads and Area Managers to
track the specific locations of employees and how much "idle time" they gain
when not working. In a German television report broadcast in February 2013,
journalists Diana Löbl and Peter Onneken conducted a covert investigation at the
distribution center of Amazon in the town of Bad Hersfeld in the German state of
Hessen. The report highlights the behavior of some of the security guards,
themselves being employed by a third party company, who apparently either had a
Neo-nazi background or deliberately dressed in Neo-Nazi apparel and who were
intimidating foreign and temporary female workers at its distribution centers.
The third party security company involved was delisted by Amazon as a business
contact shortly after that report.

In March 2015, it was reported in The Verge that Amazon will be removing 18
months long non-compete clauses from its US employment contracts for hourly-paid
workers, after criticism that it was acting unreasonably in preventing such
employees from finding other work. Even short-term temporary workers have to
sign contracts that prohibit them from working at any company where they would
"directly or indirectly" support any good or service that competes with those
they helped support at Amazon, for 18 months after leaving Amazon, even if they
are fired or made redundant.

A substantial New York Times article published on August 16, 2015, described
evidence of an intimidating and confrontational working culture for the
company's office workers.

In an effort to boost employee morale, on November 2, 2015, Amazon announced
that it would be extending 6 weeks of paid leave for new mothers and fathers.
This change includes birth parents and adoptive parents and can be applied in
conjunction with existing maternity leave and medical leave for new mothers.

Amazon lobbies the United States federal government and state governments on
issues such as the enforcement of sales taxes on online sales, transportation
safety, privacy and data protection and intellectual property. According to
regulatory filings, Amazon.com focuses its lobbying on the US Congress, the
Federal Communications Commission and the Federal Reserve. Amazon.com spent
roughly $3.5 million, $5 million and $9.5 million on lobbying, in 2013, 2014 and
2015, respectively.

Amazon.com was a corporate member of the American Legislative Exchange Council
(ALEC) until it dropped membership following protests at its shareholders'
meeting May 24, 2012.

The initiative Choice in eCommerce was founded on May 8, 2013 by several online
retailers in Berlin, Germany. The cause was, in the view of the initiative,
sales bans and online restrictions by individual manufacturers. The dealers felt
cut off from their main sales channel and thus deprived them the opportunity to
use online platforms like Amazon, eBay or Rakuten in a competitive market for
the benefit of their customers.

In 2014, Amazon expanded its lobbying practices as it prepared to lobby the
Federal Aviation Administration to approve its drone delivery program, hiring
the Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld lobbying firm in June. Amazon and its
lobbyists have visited with Federal Aviation Administration officials and
aviation committees in Washington, D.C. to explain its plans to deliver
packages.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Channel_S

Channel S is a UK-based, free-to-air television channel targeting the British
Bangladeshi community. The channel was established on 16 December 2004, by Mahee
Ferdous Jalill – a Bangladeshi businessman in London. On Sky it had a
timesharing deal with ATN Global, and then in 2005 it started to broadcast for
24 hours, 7 days a week, and is currently available on Sky channel 814. The
channel claims to be the "Voice of British Bangladeshis across the world", and
its slogan "Working for the community", broadcasting mainly in Bengali and
occasionally in Sylheti, and programs suiting the community needs.

The television station is based at Prestige House in Walthamstow, North East
London. It broadcasts programmes in Bengali, Sylheti and a few in English. It is
the first Bangladeshi channel to broadcast content in the Sylheti dialect, it
has built up a loyal following among the Bangladeshis in the United Kingdom who
the majority come from Sylhet. Since the launch of the channel in 2004, there
has been bitter rivalry between Channel S and Bangla TV, with Channel S gaining
rights to broadcast the Baishakhi Mela. A survey in the UK found Channel S was
the most viewed Bengali TV channel in the UK.

On 16 December 2004, Channel S started to broadcast on Sky with a timesharing
deal with ATN Global on channel 827. It was founded by a Bangladeshi businessmen
based in London, Mahee Ferdous Jalil, who is also the owner of the car insurance
company Prestige Auto Group.

From 15 January 2006, it aired its programmes in Bangladesh and other countries
of South Asia, South East Asia and Middle East From August 2006, Channel S
acquired the rights to broadcast two of Bangladesh's prominent satellite
channels, NTV (Bangladesh) and ATN Bangla. These are also available on Sky
channels 826 and 827 respectively (a few months later it had stopped
broadcasting NTV, which became independent from Channel S).

On October 2008, it acquired the rights to broadcast a popular Bangladeshi
channel called, Channel i on channel 826. In May 2007, Channel S launch Islam4U
– a channel dedicated to Islamic programmes (has stopped broadcasting since).

Channel S provides viewers with a combination of cultural, political and
religious programs for the viewers, including shows which help the community
with legal or community issues. News is broadcast daily, with news coverage of
national news and international news, the main headline and political situation
in Bangladesh and the latest news headlines in Britain. Local and community news
are also broadcast from correspondents throughout the UK, including a news
programme dedicated to news coverage from Sylhet, there is a live bulletin at
7:00 pm and full news broadcast at 10:30 pm and 1:00 am, news coverage is of
Bengali. The channel has increasingly been providing programs in Sylheti, which
is the first channel to do so, the abbreviation of the channel's name S, refers
to Sylhet. It recognises that Sylheti is a separate language than Bengali,
targeting the majority Sylheti-speaking community.

Talk show programmes include, Obhimoth (English: Opinion) – focusing on events
of politics in Bangladesh, during the 2008 Bangladesh election it has broadcast
the process by viewing the voters and the communities opinions on the elections,
in the electoral constituencies of Sylhet, Habiganj, Maulvi Bazar and Sunamganj
(Voter Matthe). Let's Talk – hosted by Ajmal Masroor is a programme debating
about current and religious affairs. As it claims to be the voice of the
community, it provides people with advice concerning on legal issues, programs
include Legal Advice and community-based issues such as Reality with Mahee.
Subjects include all community-based issues, including social, business, or
contemporary, bringing solutions to problems.

There are many Bengali entertainment programs with Bengali music, drama and
shows, including Sylheti drama which are produced in Sylhet and some from east
London. Popular entertainment shows include iRonniee (a programme interviewing
notable music-songwriters), and music shows of folk, poetry by leading artists
in the UK or Bangladesh, these include Sure Sure Alap, Shudhu Binodan, Sur
Jolsha and Matir Sur. A new game show launched in February 2008, called 'Win A
Car', offers people to win a Mercedes C-class, which 'specifically targerts the
British Bangladeshi community', and has been described as the first
entertainment programme in a 'Sylheti Bangla way'. Since 2005, it has gained the
rights to broadcast the Baishakhi Mela annually. Previously the rights were held
by Bangla TV, however its commitment to the community has attracted many local
business and advertisement to Channel S. In 2009, it was the joint media partner
with BBC Asian Network, alongside the Tower Hamlets council.

Channel S is one of the first Bengali channels which are committed to
broadcasting Islamic-oriented programs. Islamic programs are shown quite
frequently. These include programs such as Islam Essentials – a live religious
talk show which provides viewers the opportunity to ask questions relating to
Islam based on every day life which features Sheikh Abdur Rahman Madani and
Quraner Alo (teaching on how to read the Qur'an). Nasheeds (religious songs) are
shown daily. Channel S has planned to launch a channel called Islam4U, which is
a 24-hour channel Islamic channel in Bengali, which however has not started
broadcasting.

There are many charity events for Islamic institutes on Channel S. In 2006 and
2007 during Ramadan, the British Bangladeshi community donated millions of
pounds on live appeals. It then led to Channel S in 2007 creating a fundraising
initiative called, the "Ramadan Family Commitment", which was the channels first
concept based scheme. It raised £146,138 in 2007 and was distributed amongst 28
organisations, there were 30 charity appeals, one during each night of Ramadan,
and "Qurbani Family Commitment", created to make the distribution of Qurbani
during Eid more easier for the Muslim community in the UK, and for Bangladesh.
Organisations which are affiliated with the organisations are Islamic Relief,
Muslim Aid and Hefazothe Islam UK. During Ramadan, Channel S has also raised
fundraising events for mosques and madrasses across the UK (e.g. East London
Mosque), and created its first Ramadan Guide in 2008 which was distributed in
the communities. As of 2008 Channel S has raised up to £7.5 million for 65
mosques, 17 madrasses and 35 other charity events. It is organised by the
Channel S Charity Department, and presented by Rizwan Hussain.

Channel S also launched a new charity programme with Muslim Aid, called
"Shahjalal & Shahporan Village", which is dedicated to raising money to build
villages for victims of Cylone Cidr in Bangladesh. Muslim Aid has hosted live
appeals on Channel S, alongside with Islam Channel. With Muslim Aid, it has
managed to raise up to over £200,000 from the community, in support of those who
were affected by Cyclone Sidr in Bangladesh. A football tournament was part of
the fundraising initiative called the SSV Charity Champions Cup 2008, consisting
of 32 teams, aiming to bring Bangladeshi footballers together across different
towns from London, Oldham and Birmingham. The event was held from 5 May to 6
July 2008, and was won by Bromley By Bow FC in the finals at Mile End Stadium,
east London. The aim of the fundraising event is to build two villages which are
called Shahjalal & Shahporan, with each receiving 360 built houses, including
schools, medical centres and mosques, and aims to raise up to £720,000.

There are also other various shows available for all other viewers. Programme
Bits n Bytes is an IT show specifically targeting people who use computers for
business or home use. It helps viewers with problems relating to computer
software or systems, and develop the skills of using IT. It provides the latest
IT news, software solutions and offers. It also gives the viewers an opportunity
to participate in competitions, and win technology products or software such as
an iPhone or an Arabic learning software provided by Purple-i. It is the only IT
weekly programme within the South Asian Broadcasting Industry in the UK,
presented in English and Sylheti.

Viewers also have the opportunity to view their village or town in Bangladesh,
by calling and requesting on programmes such as Amar Gao, there are many
recorded videos of villages across the region of Sylhet. There are also shows
available for women and children, for example Mojar Ranna (a cooking show) and
It's Our Day (entertainment for children).

In June 2007, First Solution Money Transfer, a financial services company run by
at least one the managing directors of Channel S went into liquidation owing the
public hundreds of thousands of pounds. Mahee Ferdous Jalil, the chairman of
Channel S, filed for an injunction against Bangla TV to prevent allegations of
impropriety by Channel S or its chairman from being broadcast as well as
defamations cases against a number of prominent businessmen who had made the
allegations.

As of April 2008, Channel S (including other Bengali channels) was under
investigation by Ofcom for a breach of the Communications Act 2003, after airing
election adverts for the Liberal Democrats during the London mayoral election,
2008. The channel accepted adverts from the local Liberal Democrats candidate,
Jalal Rajonuddin. Ofcom found Channel S guilty of breaching the TV Advertising
Code.

On 4 August 2008, according to the City of London police, Mahee Ferdous Jalil
(Mohammed Ferdhaus) founder of the channel (along with many others) was found
guilty, at Croydon Crown Court, of car insurance fraud and sentenced to an 18
months prison term. The group were involved in a plot to make false car
insurance claims and were ordered to pay compensation costs to the AXA insurance
company. Since the arrest of Jalil, a media war broke out with Channel S and
Bangla TV. It was noted that Bangla TV broadcast negative news coverage against
Jalil and Channel S, leading to propaganda and different speculations of the
event. It raised much concern among the community and politicians, which many
thought was an attack against Channel S by Bangla TV. He was released after
serving 7 months of his term, as he appeared at the Channel S Community Awards
on 30 March 2009. It is now confirmed that Jalil has pleaded guilty for
insurance scam and is awaiting sentence. This will be the 2nd time Jalil will be
in Her Majesty's pleasure. He has already served 7 months of his 15 months
sentence for insurance fraud.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tony_Blair

Anthony Charles Lynton Blair (born 6 May 1953) is a British politician who
served as the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1997 to 2007 and the
Leader of the Labour Party from 1994 to 2007.

From 1983 to 2007, Blair was the MP for Sedgefield. He was elected Labour Party
leader in July 1994, following the sudden death of his predecessor, John Smith,
who together with his predecessor, Neil Kinnock, had started to move the party
closer to the political centre, in the hope of winning power. Under Blair's
leadership, the party used the phrase "New Labour", to distance it from previous
Labour policies and the traditional conception of socialism. Blair declared
support for a new conception that he referred to as "social-ism", involving
politics that recognised individuals as socially interdependent, and advocated
social justice, cohesion, the equal worth of each citizen, and equal
opportunity, also referred to as the Third Way. Critics of Blair denounced him
for having the Labour Party abandon genuine socialism and accepting capitalism.
Supporters, including the party's public opinion pollster Philip Gould, stated
that after four consecutive general election defeats, the Labour Party had to
demonstrate that it had made a decisive break from its left-wing past, in order
to win an election again.

In May 1997, the Labour Party won a landslide general election victory, the
largest in its history, allowing Blair, at 43 years old, to become the youngest
Prime Minister since 1812. In September 1997, Blair attained early personal
popularity, receiving a 93% public approval rating, after his public response to
the death of Princess Diana. The Labour Party went on to win two more elections
under his leadership: in 2001, in which it won another landslide victory, and in
2005, with a reduced majority. In the first years of the New Labour government,
Blair's government introduced the National Minimum Wage Act, Human Rights Act,
and Freedom of Information Act. Blair's government also devolved power,
establishing the Scottish Parliament, the National Assembly for Wales, and the
Northern Ireland Assembly. In Northern Ireland, Blair was involved in the 1998
Good Friday Agreement.

Blair strongly supported the foreign policy of the Bush administration, and
ensured that the British Armed Forces participated in the 2001 invasion of
Afghanistan and, more controversially, the 2003 invasion of Iraq. Blair has
faced strong criticism for his role in the invasion of Iraq, including calls for
having him tried for war crimes and waging a war of aggression. In 2016, the
Iraq Inquiry strongly criticised his actions and described the invasion of Iraq
as unjustified and unnecessary. Blair also intervened militarily in Kosovo and
Sierra Leone.

Blair was succeeded as the leader of the Labour Party and as Prime Minister by
Gordon Brown in June 2007. On the day that Blair resigned as Prime Minister, he
was appointed the official Special Envoy of the Quartet on the Middle East, an
office which he held until May 2015. He now runs a consultancy business and has
set up various foundations in his own name, including the Tony Blair Faith
Foundation.

Anthony Charles Lynton Blair was born in Edinburgh, Scotland, on 6 May 1953, the
second son of Leo and Hazel (née Corscadden) Blair.[citation needed] Leo Blair,
the illegitimate son of two entertainers, had been adopted as a baby by Glasgow
shipyard worker James Blair and his wife, Mary. Hazel Corscadden was the
daughter of George Corscadden, a butcher and Orangeman who moved to Glasgow in
1916 but returned to (and later died in) Ballyshannon, County Donegal in 1923,
where his wife, Sarah Margaret (née Lipsett), gave birth to Blair's mother,
Hazel, above the family's grocery shop.

Blair has one elder brother, Sir William Blair, a High Court judge, and a
younger sister, Sarah. Blair spent the first 19 months of his life at the family
home in Paisley Terrace in the Willowbrae area of Edinburgh. During this period,
his father worked as a junior tax inspector whilst also studying for a law
degree from the University of Edinburgh.

In the 1950s, his family spent three and a half years in Adelaide, South
Australia, where his father was a lecturer in law at the University of Adelaide.
The Blairs lived close to the university, in the suburb of Dulwich. The family
returned to the UK in the late 1950s, living for a time with Hazel's mother and
stepfather (William McClay) at their home in Stepps, near Glasgow. He spent the
remainder of his childhood in Durham, England, where his father Leo lectured at
Durham University.

After attending the Chorister School in Durham from 1961 to 1966, Blair boarded
at Fettes College, a prestigious independent school in Edinburgh, during which
time he met Charlie Falconer (a pupil at the rival Edinburgh Academy), whom he
later appointed Lord Chancellor. Blair reportedly modelled himself on Mick
Jagger. His teachers were unimpressed with him; his biographer, John Rentoul,
reported that "All the teachers I spoke to when researching the book said he was
a complete pain in the backside and they were very glad to see the back of him."

After Fettes, Blair spent a year in London, where he attempted to find fame as a
rock music promoter before reading Jurisprudence at St John's College, at the
University of Oxford. As a student, he played guitar and sang in a rock band
called Ugly Rumours, and performed some stand-up comedy, including parodying
James T. Kirk as a character named Captain Kink.

He was influenced by fellow student and Anglican priest Peter Thomson, who
awakened his religious faith and left-wing politics. While Blair was at Oxford,
his mother Hazel died of cancer, which greatly affected him. After graduating
from Oxford in 1975 with a Second-Class Honours B.A. in Jurisprudence, Blair
became a member of Lincoln's Inn, enrolled as a pupil barrister, and met his
future wife, Cherie Booth (daughter of the actor Tony Booth) at the law chambers
founded by Derry Irvine (who was to be Blair's first Lord Chancellor), 11 King's
Bench Walk Chambers.

Blair joined the Labour Party shortly after graduating from Oxford in 1975. In
the early 1980s, he was involved in Labour politics in Hackney South and
Shoreditch, where he aligned himself with the "soft left" of the party. He put
himself forward as a candidate for the Hackney council elections of 1982 in
Queensbridge ward, a safe Labour area, but was not selected.

In 1982, Blair was selected as the Labour candidate in the safe Conservative
seat of Beaconsfield, where there was a forthcoming by-election. Although Blair
lost the Beaconsfield by-election and Labour's share of the vote fell 10
percentage points, he acquired a profile within the party.[citation needed] In
contrast to his later centrism, Blair made it clear in a letter he wrote to
Labour leader Michael Foot in July 1982 (published in 2006) that he had "come to
Socialism through Marxism" and considered himself on the left. Like Tony Benn,
Blair believed that "Labour right" was bankrupt: "Socialism ultimately must
appeal to the better minds of the people. You cannot do that if you are tainted
overmuch with a pragmatic period in power." Yet, he saw the hard left as no
better, saying:

With a general election due, Blair had not been selected as a candidate
anywhere. He was invited to stand again in Beaconsfield, and was initially
inclined to agree but was advised by his head of chambers Derry Irvine to find
somewhere else which might be winnable. The situation was complicated by the
fact that Labour was fighting a legal action against planned boundary changes,
and had selected candidates on the basis of previous boundaries. When the legal
challenge failed, the party had to rerun all selections on the new boundaries;
most were based on existing seats, but unusually in County Durham a new
Sedgefield constituency had been created out of Labour-voting areas which had no
obvious predecessor seat.

The selection for Sedgefield did not begin until after the 1983 election was
called. Blair's initial inquiries discovered that the left was trying to arrange
the selection for Les Huckfield, sitting MP for Nuneaton who was trying
elsewhere; several sitting MPs displaced by boundary changes were also
interested in it. When he discovered the Trimdon branch had not yet made a
nomination, Blair visited them and won the support of the branch secretary John
Burton, and with Burton's help was nominated by the branch. At the last minute,
he was added to the shortlist and won the selection over Huckfield. It was the
last candidate selection made by Labour before the election, and was made after
the Labour Party had issued biographies of all its candidates ("Labour's
Election Who's Who").

John Burton became Blair's election agent and one of his most trusted and
longest-standing allies. Blair's election literature in the 1983 UK general
election endorsed left-wing policies that Labour advocated in the early
1980s.[citation needed] He called for Britain to leave the EEC as early as the
1970s, though he had told his selection conference that he personally favoured
continuing membership[citation needed] and voted "Yes" in the 1975 referendum on
the subject. He opposed the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) in 1986 but supported
the ERM by 1989. He was a member of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament,
despite never strongly being in favour of unilateral nuclear disarmament. Blair
was helped on the campaign trail by soap opera actress Pat Phoenix, his
father-in-law's girlfriend. Blair was elected as MP for Sedgefield despite the
party's landslide defeat in the general election.[citation needed]

In his maiden speech in the House of Commons on 6 July 1983, Blair stated, "I am
a socialist not through reading a textbook that has caught my intellectual
fancy, nor through unthinking tradition, but because I believe that, at its
best, socialism corresponds most closely to an existence that is both rational
and moral. It stands for cooperation, not confrontation; for fellowship, not
fear. It stands for equality."

Once elected, Blair's political ascent was rapid. He received his first
front-bench appointment in 1984 as assistant Treasury spokesman. In May 1985, he
appeared on BBC's Question Time, arguing that the Conservative Government's
Public Order White Paper was a threat to civil liberties.

Blair demanded an inquiry into the Bank of England's decision to rescue the
collapsed Johnson Matthey Bank in October 1985. By this time, Blair was aligned
with the reforming tendencies in the party (headed by leader Neil Kinnock) and
was promoted after the 1987 election to the shadow Trade and Industry team as
spokesman on the City of London.[citation needed]

In 1987, he stood for election to the Shadow Cabinet, receiving 71 votes. When
Kinnock resigned after a further Conservative victory in the 1992 election,
Blair became Shadow Home Secretary under John Smith. The old guard argued that
trends showed they were regaining strength under Smith's strong leadership.
Meanwhile, the breakaway SDP faction had merged with the Liberal Party; the
resulting Liberal Democrats seemed to pose a major threat to the Labour base.
Tony Blair had an entirely different vision. Blair, the leader of the
modernising faction, argued that the long-term trends had to be reversed. The
Party was too locked into a base that was shrinking, since it was based on the
working-class, on trade unions, and on residents of subsidised council housing.
The rapidly growing middle class was largely ignored, especially the more
ambitious working-class families. They aspired to middle-class status, but
accepted the Conservative argument that Labour was holding ambitious people back
with its levelling down policies. They increasingly saw Labour in terms defined
by the opposition, regarding higher taxes and higher interest rates. In order to
present a fresh face and new policies to the elect, New Labour needed more than
fresh leaders; it had to jettison outdated policies. The first step was
procedural, but essential. Calling on the slogan, "One member, one vote" Blair
(with some help from Smith) defeated the union element and ended the block
voting by which leaders of labour unions cast hundreds of thousands of votes on
behalf of their members, and had an outsize voice in the party. Blair and the
modernizers called for radical adjustment of Party goals by repealing "Clause
IV," the historic commitment to nationalisation of industry. That was achieved
in 1995.

John Smith died suddenly in 1994 of a heart attack. Blair beat John Prescott and
Margaret Beckett in the subsequent leadership election and became Leader of the
Opposition. As is customary for the holder of that office, Blair was appointed a
Privy Councillor.

Labour was seen by The Guardian to be "definitely socialistic" since its first
constitution was published in 1918, saying that support for the "common
ownership of the means of production and exchange" in Clause IV of the party's
constitution, was "decisive" in making Labour a socialist party. Blair announced
at the end of his speech at the 1994 Labour Party conference that he intended to
replace this clause of the party's constitution with a new statement of aims and
values. This involved the deletion of the party's stated commitment to "the
common ownership of the means of production and exchange", which was widely
interpreted as referring to wholesale nationalisation. At a special conference
in April 1995, the clause was replaced by a statement that the party is
"democratic socialist", and Blair also claimed to be a "democratic socialist"
himself in the same year. However, the move away from nationalisation in the old
Clause IV made many on the left of the Labour Party feel that Labour was moving
away from traditional socialist principles of nationalisation set out in 1918,
and was seen by them as part of a shift of the party towards "New Labour".

He inherited the Labour leadership at a time when the party was ascendant over
the Tories in the opinion polls since the Tory government's reputation for
monetary excellence was left in tatters by the Black Wednesday economic disaster
of September 1992. Blair's election as leader saw Labour support surge higher
still in spite of the continuing economic recovery and fall in unemployment that
the Conservative government (led by John Major) had overseen since the end of
the 1990–92 recession. At the 1996 Labour Party conference, Blair stated that
his three top priorities on coming to office were "education, education, and
education".

Aided by the unpopularity of John Major's Conservative government (itself deeply
divided over the European Union), "New Labour" won a landslide victory in the
1997 general election, ending 18 years of Conservative Party government, with
the heaviest Conservative defeat since 1906.

According to diaries released by Paddy Ashdown, during Smith's leadership of the
Labour Party, there were discussions with Ashdown about forming a coalition
government if the next general election resulted in a hung parliament. Ashdown
also claimed that Blair was a supporter of proportional representation (PR). In
addition to Ashdown, Liberal Democrat MPs Menzies Campbell and Alan Beith were
earmarked for places in the cabinet if the coalition was formed. Blair was
forced to back down on these proposals because John Prescott and Gordon Brown
opposed the PR system, and many members of the shadow cabinet were worried about
concessions being made towards the Lib Dems. However, after Blair became leader,
these talks continued[citation needed] – despite virtually every opinion poll
since late 1992 having shown Labour with enough support to form a majority.
However, the scale of the Labour victory meant that there was ultimately never
any need for a coalition.[citation needed]

Blair became the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom on 2 May 1997, serving
concurrently as First Lord of the Treasury, Minister for the Civil Service and
Leader of the Labour Party. The 43-year-old Blair became the youngest person to
become Prime Minister since Lord Liverpool became Prime Minister at the age of
42 in 1812. With victories in 1997, 2001, and 2005, Blair was the Labour Party's
longest-serving prime minister, the only person to date to lead the party to
three consecutive general election victories.[citation needed]

His contribution towards assisting the Northern Ireland peace process by helping
to negotiate the Good Friday Agreement (after 30 years of conflict) was widely
recognised. Following the Omagh bombing on 15 August 1998, by members of the
Real IRA opposed to the peace process, which killed 29 people and wounded
hundreds, Blair visited the County Tyrone town and met with victims at Royal
Victoria Hospital, Belfast.

In his first six years in office Blair ordered British troops into battle five
times, more than any other prime minister in British history. This included Iraq
in both 1998 and 2003, Kosovo (1999), Sierra Leone (2000) and Afghanistan
(2001).

The Kosovo War, which Blair had advocated on moral grounds, was initially a
failure when it relied solely on air strikes; the threat of a ground offensive
convinced Serbia's Slobodan Milošević to withdraw. Blair had been a major
advocate for a ground offensive, which Bill Clinton was reluctant to do, and
ordered that 50,000 soldiers – most of the available British Army – should be
made ready for action. The following year, the limited Operation Palliser in
Sierra Leone swiftly swung the tide against the rebel forces; before deployment,
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone had been on the verge of collapse.
Palliser had been intended as an evacuation mission but Brigadier David Richards
was able to convince Blair to allow him to expand the role; at the time,
Richards' action was not known and Blair was assumed to be behind it.

Blair ordered Operation Barras, a highly successful SAS/Parachute Regiment
strike to rescue hostages from a Sierra Leone rebel group. Historian Andrew Marr
has argued that the success of ground attacks, real and threatened, over air
strikes alone was influential on how Blair planned the Iraq War, and that the
success of the first three wars Blair fought "played to his sense of himself as
a moral war leader". When asked in 2010 if the success of Palliser may have
"embolden[ed] British politicians" to think of military action as a policy
option, General Sir David Richards admitted there "might be something in that".

From the start of the War on Terror in 2001, Blair strongly supported the
foreign policy of George W. Bush, participating in the 2001 invasion of
Afghanistan and 2003 invasion of Iraq. The invasion of Iraq was particularly
controversial, as it attracted widespread public opposition and 139 of Blair's
MPs opposed it.

As a result, he faced criticism over the policy itself and the circumstances of
the decision. Alastair Campbell described Blair's statement that the
intelligence on WMDs was "beyond doubt" as his "assessment of the assessment
that was given to him." In 2009, Blair stated that he would have supported
removing Saddam Hussein from power even in the face of proof that he had no such
weapons. Playwright Harold Pinter and former Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir
Mohamad accused Blair of war crimes.

Testifying before the Iraq Inquiry on 29 January 2010, Blair said Saddam was a
"monster and I believe he threatened not just the region but the world." Blair
said that British and American attitude towards Saddam Hussein had "changed
dramatically" after the 11 September attacks. Blair denied that he would have
supported the invasion of Iraq even if he had thought Saddam had no weapons of
mass destruction. He said he believed the world was safer as a result of the
invasion. He said there was "no real difference between wanting regime change
and wanting Iraq to disarm: regime change was US policy because Iraq was in
breach of its UN obligations." In an October 2015 CNN interview with Fareed
Zakaria, Blair apologised for his "mistakes" over Iraq War and admitted there
were "elements of truth" to the view that the invasion helped promote the rise
of ISIS. The Chilcot Inquiry report of 2016 gave a damning assessment of Blair's
role in the Iraq War, though the former prime minister again refused to
apologise for his decision to back the US-led invasion.

One of his first acts as Prime Minister was to replace the then twice-weekly
15-minute sessions of Prime Minister's Questions held on Tuesdays and Thursdays
with a single 30-minute session on Wednesdays. In addition to PMQs, Blair held
monthly press conferences at which he fielded questions from journalists and –
from 2002 – broke precedent by agreeing to give evidence twice yearly before the
most senior Commons select committee, the Liaison Committee. Blair was sometimes
perceived as paying insufficient attention both to the views of his own Cabinet
colleagues and to those of the House of Commons. His style was sometimes
criticised as not that of a prime minister and head of government, which he was,
but of a president and head of state – which he was not. Blair was accused of
excessive reliance on spin. He is the first British prime minister to have been
formally questioned by police, though not under caution, while still in office.

As the casualties of the Iraq War mounted, Blair was accused of misleading
Parliament, and his popularity dropped dramatically.

Labour's overall majority in the 2005 general election was reduced to 66. As a
combined result of the Blair–Brown pact, Iraq war and low approval ratings,
pressure built up within the Labour party for Blair to resign. Over the summer
of 2006 many MPs, including usually supportive MPs, criticised Blair for his
failure to call for a ceasefire in the 2006 Israel–Lebanon conflict. On 7
September 2006, Blair publicly stated he would step down as party leader by the
time of the Trades Union Congress (TUC) conference held 10–13 September 2007,
having promised to serve a full term during the previous general election
campaign. On 10 May 2007, during a speech at the Trimdon Labour Club, Blair
announced his intention to resign as Labour Party leader and Prime
Minister.[citation needed]

At a special party conference in Manchester on 24 June 2007, he formally handed
over the leadership of the Labour Party to Gordon Brown, who had been Chancellor
of the Exchequer. Blair tendered his resignation on 27 June 2007 and Brown
assumed office the same afternoon. Blair resigned his seat in the House of
Commons in the traditional form of accepting the Stewardship of the Chiltern
Hundreds, to which he was appointed by Gordon Brown in one of the latter's last
acts as Chancellor of the Exchequer. The resulting Sedgefield by-election was
won by Labour's candidate, Phil Wilson. Blair decided not to issue a list of
Resignation Honours, making him the first Prime Minister of the modern era not
to do so.

In 2001, Blair said, "We are a left of centre party, pursuing economic
prosperity and social justice as partners and not as opposites".

Blair rarely applies such labels to himself, but he promised before the 1997
election that New Labour would govern "from the radical centre", and according
to one lifelong Labour Party member, has always described himself as a social
democrat. However, at least one left-wing commentator has said that Blair is to
the right of centre. A YouGov opinion poll in 2005 found that a small majority
of British voters, including many New Labour supporters, place Blair on the
right of the political spectrum. The Financial Times on the other hand has
argued that Blair is not conservative, but instead a populist.

Critics and admirers tend to agree that Blair's electoral success was based on
his ability to occupy the centre ground and appeal to voters across the
political spectrum, to the extent that he has been fundamentally at odds with
traditional Labour Party values. Some left-wing critics, such as Mike Marqusee
in 2001, argued that Blair oversaw the final stage of a long term shift of the
Labour Party to the right.

There is some evidence that Blair's long term dominance of the centre forced his
Conservative opponents to shift a long distance to the left to challenge his
hegemony there. Leading Conservatives of the post-New Labour era hold Blair in
high regard: George Osborne describes him as "the master", Michael Gove thought
he was "entitlement to conservative respect" in February 2003, while David
Cameron reportedly maintained Blair as an informal adviser.

During his time as prime minister, Blair raised taxes; introduced a National
Minimum Wage and some new employment rights (while keeping Margaret Thatcher's
trade union reforms); introduced significant constitutional reforms; promoted
new rights for gay people in the Civil Partnership Act 2004; and signed treaties
integrating Britain more closely with the EU. He introduced substantial
market-based reforms in the education and health sectors; introduced student
tuition fees; sought to reduce certain categories of welfare payments, and
introduced tough anti-terrorism and identity card legislation. Under Blair's
government the amount of new legislation increased which attracted criticism.

Blair increased police powers by adding to the number of arrestable offences,
compulsory DNA recording and the use of dispersal orders. He did not reverse the
privatisation of the railways enacted by his predecessor John Major and instead
strengthened regulation (by creating the Office of Rail Regulation) and limited
fare rises to inflation +1%.

Blair has criticised other governments for not doing enough to solve global
climate change. In a 1997 visit to the United States, he made a comment on
"great industrialised nations" that fail to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Again in 2003, Blair went before the United States Congress and said that
climate change "cannot be ignored", insisting "we need to go beyond even Kyoto."
Blair and his party promised a 20% reduction in carbon dioxide. The Labour Party
also claimed that by 2010 10% of the energy would come from renewable resources;
however, it only reached 7% by that point.

In 2000, Blair "flagged up" 100 million euros for green policies and urged
environmentalists and businesses to work together.

Blair built his foreign policy on basic principles (close ties with US and EU)
and added a new activist philosophy of "interventionism". In 2001 Britain joined
the US in the global war on terror.

Blair forged friendships with several European leaders, including Silvio
Berlusconi of Italy, Angela Merkel of Germany and later Nicolas Sarkozy of
France.

Along with enjoying a close relationship with Bill Clinton, Blair formed a
strong political alliance with George W. Bush, particularly in the area of
foreign policy. For his part, Bush lauded Blair and the UK. In his post-9/11
speech, for example, he stated that "America has no truer friend than Great
Britain".

The alliance between Bush and Blair seriously damaged Blair's standing in the
eyes of Britons angry at American influence. Blair argued it was in Britain's
interest to "protect and strengthen the bond" with the United States regardless
of who is in the White House.

However, a perception of one-sided compromising personal and political closeness
led to discussion of the term "Poodle-ism" in the UK media, to describe the
"Special Relationship" of the UK government and Prime Minister with the US White
House and President. A revealing conversation between Bush and Blair, with the
former addressing the latter as "Yo [or Yeah], Blair" was recorded when they did
not know a microphone was live at the G8 summit in Saint Petersburg in 2006.

Blair showed a deep feeling for Israel, born in part from his faith. Blair has
been a longtime member of the pro-Israel lobby group Labour Friends of Israel.

In 1994, Blair forged close ties with Michael Levy, a leader of the Jewish
Leadership Council. Levy ran the Labour Leader's Office Fund to finance Blair's
campaign before the 1997 election and raised £12 million towards Labour's
landslide victory, Levy was rewarded with a peerage, and in 2002, Blair
appointed Lord Levy as his personal envoy to the Middle East. Levy praised Blair
for his "solid and committed support of the State of Israel". Tam Dalyell, while
Father of the House of Commons, suggested in 2003 that Blair's foreign policy
decisions were unduly influenced by a "cabal" of Jewish advisers, including
Levy, Peter Mandelson and Jack Straw (the last two are not Jewish but have some
Jewish ancestry).

Blair, on coming to office, had been "cool towards the right-wing Netanyahu
government". During his first visit to Israel, Blair thought the Israelis bugged
him in his car. After the election in 1999 of Ehud Barak, with whom Blair forged
a close relationship, he became much more sympathetic to Israel. From 2001,
Blair built up a relationship [clarification needed] with Barak's successor,
Ariel Sharon, and responded positively to Arafat, whom he had met thirteen times
since becoming prime minister and regarded as essential to future negotiations.
In 2004, 50 former diplomats, including ambassadors to Baghdad and Tel Aviv,
stated they had "watched with deepening concern" at Britain following the US
into war in Iraq in 2003. They criticised Blair's support for the road map for
peace which included the retaining of Israeli settlements on the West Bank.

In 2006 Blair was criticised for his failure to immediately call for a ceasefire
in the 2006 Lebanon War. The Observer newspaper claimed that at a cabinet
meeting before Blair left for a summit with Bush on 28 July 2006, a significant
number of ministers pressured Blair to publicly criticise Israel over the scale
of deaths and destruction in Lebanon. Blair was criticised for his solid stance
alongside US President George W. Bush on Middle East policy.

A Freedom of Information request by The Sunday Times in 2012 revealed that
Blair's government considered knighting Syria's President Bashar al-Assad. The
documents showed Blair was willing to appear alongside Assad at a joint press
conference even though the Syrians would probably have settled for a farewell
handshake for the cameras; British officials sought to manipulate the media to
portray Assad in a favourable light; and Blair's aides tried to help Assad's
"photogenic" wife boost her profile. The newspaper noted:

Blair had been on friendly terms with Colonel Gaddafi, the leader of Libya, when
sanctions imposed on the country were lifted by the USA and the UK.

Even after the Libyan Civil War in 2011, he said he had no regrets about his
close relationship with the late Libyan leader. During Blair's premiership, MI6
rendered Abdelhakim Belhadj to the Gaddafi regime in 2004, though Blair later
claimed he had "no recollection" of the incident.

Blair was reported by The Guardian in 2006 to have been supported politically by
Rupert Murdoch, the founder of the News Corporation organisation. In 2011, Blair
became Godfather to one of Rupert Murdoch's children with Wendi Deng, but he and
Murdoch later ended their friendship, in 2014, after Murdoch suspected him of
having an affair with Deng while they were still married, according to The
Economist magazine.[better source needed]

A Cabinet Office freedom of information response, released the day after Blair
handed over power to Gordon Brown, documents Blair having various official phone
calls and meetings with Rupert Murdoch of News Corporation and Richard Desmond
of Northern and Shell Media.

The response includes contacts "clearly of an official nature" in the specified
period, but excludes contacts "not clearly of an official nature." No details
were given of the subjects discussed. In the period between September 2002 and
April 2005, Blair and Murdoch are documented speaking 6 times; three times in
the 9 days before the Iraq War, including the eve of 20 March US and UK
invasion, and on 29 January 25 April and 3 October 2004. Between January 2003
and February 2004, Blair had three meetings with Richard Desmond; on 29 January
and 3 September 2003 and 23 February 2004.

The information was disclosed after a three and a half-year battle by the
Liberal Democrats' Lord Avebury. Lord Avebury's initial October 2003 information
request was dismissed by then leader of the Lords, Baroness Amos. A following
complaint was rejected, with Downing Street claiming the information compromised
free and frank discussions, while Cabinet Office claimed releasing the timing of
the PM's contacts with individuals is undesirable, as it might lead to the
content of the discussions being disclosed. While awaiting a following appeal
from Lord Avebury, the cabinet office announced that it would release the
information. Lord Avebury said: "The public can now scrutinise the timing of his
(Murdoch's) contacts with the former Prime Minister, to see whether they can be
linked to events in the outside world."

Blair appeared before the Leveson Inquiry on Monday 28 May 2012. During his
appearance, a protester, later named as David Lawley-Wakelin, got into the
court-room and claimed he was guilty of war crimes before being dragged out.

Blair has been noted as a charismatic, articulate speaker with an informal
style. Film and theatre director Richard Eyre opined that "Blair had a very
considerable skill as a performer". A few months after becoming Prime Minister
Blair gave a tribute to Diana, Princess of Wales, on the morning of her death in
August 1997, in which he famously described her as "the People's Princess".

After taking office in 1997, Blair gave particular prominence to his press
secretary, who became known as the Prime Minister's Official Spokesman (the two
roles have since been separated). Blair's first PMOS was Alastair Campbell, who
served in that role from May 1997 to 8 June 2001, after which he served as the
Prime Minister's Director of Communications and Strategy until his resignation
on 29 August 2003 in the aftermath of the Hutton Inquiry.

Blair had close relationships with the Clinton family. The strong partnership
with Bill Clinton was made into the film "The Special Relationship" in 2010.

Blair's apparent refusal to set a date for his departure was criticised by the
British press and Members of Parliament. It has been reported that a number of
cabinet ministers believed that Blair's timely departure from office would be
required to be able to win a fourth election. Some ministers viewed Blair's
announcement of policy initiatives in September 2006 as an attempt to draw
attention away from these issues.

After the death of John Smith in 1994, Blair and his close colleague Gordon
Brown (they shared an office at the House of Commons) were both seen as possible
candidates for the party leadership. They agreed not to stand against each
other, it is said, as part of a supposed Blair–Brown pact. Brown, who considered
himself the senior of the two, understood that Blair would give way to him:
opinion polls soon indicated, however, that Blair appeared to enjoy greater
support among voters. Their relationship in power became so turbulent that (it
was reported) the deputy prime minister, John Prescott, often had to act as
"marriage guidance counsellor".

During the 2010 election campaign Blair publicly endorsed Gordon Brown's
leadership, praising the way he had handled the financial crisis.

On 27 June 2007, Blair officially resigned as Prime Minister after ten years in
office, and he was officially confirmed as Middle East envoy for the United
Nations, European Union, United States, and Russia. Blair originally indicated
that he would retain his parliamentary seat after his resignation as Prime
Minister came into effect; however, on being confirmed for the Middle East role
he resigned from the Commons by taking up an office of profit. President George
W. Bush had preliminary talks with Blair to ask him to take up the envoy role.
White House sources stated that "both Israel and the Palestinians had signed up
to the proposal". On 27 May 2015, Tony Blair wrote to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, Ban Ki-moon to confirm his resignation as Middle East envoy.

In May 2008, Blair announced a new plan for peace and for Palestinian rights,
based heavily on the ideas of the Peace Valley plan.

In January 2008, it was confirmed that Blair would be joining investment bank
JPMorgan Chase in a "senior advisory capacity" and that he would advise Zurich
Financial Services on climate change. His salary for this work is unknown,
although it has been claimed it may be in excess of £500,000 per year. Blair
also gives lectures, earning up to US$250,000 for a 90-minute speech, and in
2008 he was said to be the highest paid speaker in the world.

Yale University announced on 7 March 2008 that Blair will teach a course on
issues of faith and globalisation at the Yale Schools of Management and Divinity
as a Howland distinguished fellow during the 2008–09 academic year. In July
2009, this accomplishment was followed by the launching of the Faith and
Globalisation Initiative with Yale University in the US, Durham University in
the UK, and the National University of Singapore in Asia, to deliver a
postgraduate programme in partnership with the Foundation.

Blair's links with, and receipt of an undisclosed sum from, UI Energy
Corporation, have also been subject to media comment in the UK.

In July 2010 it was reported that his personal security guards claimed £250,000
a year in expenses from the tax payer, Foreign Secretary William Hague said; "we
have to make sure that [Blair's security] is as cost-effective as possible, that
it doesn't cost any more to the taxpayer than is absolutely necessary".

Blair established Tony Blair Associates to "allow him to provide, in partnership
with others, strategic advice on a commercial and pro bono basis, on political
and economic trends and governmental reform". The profits from the firm go
towards supporting Blair's "work on faith, Africa and climate change".

Blair has been subject to criticism for potential conflicts of interest between
his diplomatic role as a Middle East envoy, and his work with Tony Blair
Associates, and a number of prominent critics have even called for him to be
sacked. Blair has used his Quartet Tony Blair Associates works with the
Khazakstan government, advising the regime on judicial, economic and political
reforms, but has been subject to criticism after accusations of "whitewashing"
the image and human rights record of the regime.

Blair responded to such criticism by saying his choice to advise the country is
an example of how he can "nudge controversial figures on a progressive path of
reform", and has stated that he receives no personal profit from this advisory
role. The Kazakhstan foreign minister said that the country was "honoured and
privileged" to be receiving advice from Blair. A letter obtained by The Daily
Telegraph in August 2014 revealed Blair had given damage-limitation advice to
Nazarbayev after the December 2011 Zhanaozen massacre. Blair was reported to
have accepted a business advisory role with President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi of
Egypt, a situation deemed incompatible with his role as Middle East envoy. Blair
described the report as "nonsense".

In October 2007, there was speculation in the media that Blair was open to the
idea of becoming the first President of the European Council, a post created in
the Treaty of Lisbon that would come into force in 2009, if successfully
ratified. Gordon Brown added his support, but noted that it was premature to
discuss candidates before the treaty was approved. A spokesman for Blair did not
rule out him accepting the post, but said that he was concentrating on his
current role in the Middle East. Blair was later invited to speak on European
issues at a rally of President Sarkozy's party, the Union for a Popular
Movement, on 12 January 2008, which fuelled speculation further.

There was opposition to Blair's potential candidacy for the job. In the UK, the
Conservative Party and the Liberal Democrats both said they would oppose Blair.
In Germany, the leader of the Free Democrats, Guido Westerwelle, said that he
preferred a candidate from a smaller European country.

In November 2009, Belgian PM Herman Van Rompuy was named President of the
European Council.

On 14 November 2007, Blair launched the Tony Blair Sports Foundation, which aims
to "increase childhood participation in sports activities, especially in the
North East of England, where a larger proportion of children are socially
excluded, and to promote overall health and prevent childhood obesity." On 30
May 2008, Blair launched the Tony Blair Faith Foundation as a vehicle for
encouraging different faiths to join together in promoting respect and
understanding, as well as working to tackle poverty. Reflecting Blair's own
faith but not dedicated to any particular religion, the Foundation aims to "show
how faith is a powerful force for good in the modern world". "The Foundation
will use its profile and resources to encourage people of faith to work together
more closely to tackle global poverty and conflict," says its mission statement.

In February 2009, he applied to set up a charity called the Tony Blair Africa
Governance Initiative: the application was approved in November 2009. In October
2012 Blair's foundation hit controversy when it emerged they were taking on
unpaid interns.

In December 2016 Blair created the Tony Blair Institute to promote global
outlooks by governments and organisations.

In March 2010, it was reported that Blair's memoirs, titled The Journey, would
be published in September 2010. In July 2010 it was announced the memoirs would
be retitled A Journey. The memoirs were seen by many as controversial and a
further attempt to profit from his office and from acts related to overseas wars
that were widely seen as wrong, leading to anger and suspicion prior to launch.

On 16 August 2010 it was announced that Blair would give the £4.6 million
advance and all royalties from his memoirs to a sports centre for badly injured
soldiers – the charity's largest ever single donation.

Media analysis of the sudden announcement was wide-ranging, describing it as an
act of "desperation" to obtain a better launch reception of a humiliating
"publishing flop" that had languished in the ratings, "blood money" for the
lives lost in the Iraq and Afghanistan wars, an act with a "hidden motive" or an
expression of "guilt", a "genius move" to address the problem that "Tony Blair
ha[d] one of the most toxic brands around" from a PR perspective, and a "cynical
stunt to wipe the slate", but also as an attempt to make amends. Friends had
said that the act was partly motivated by the wish to "repair his reputation".

The book was published on 1 September and within hours of its launch had become
the fastest-selling autobiography of all time. On 3 September Blair gave his
first live interview since publication on The Late Late Show in Ireland, with
protesters lying in wait there for him. On 4 September Blair was confronted by
200 anti-war and hardline Irish nationalist demonstrators before the first book
signing of his memoirs at Eason's bookstore on O'Connell Street in Dublin, with
angry activists chanting "war criminal" and that he had "blood on his hands",
and clashing with Irish Police (Garda Síochána) as they tried to break through a
security cordon outside the Eason's store. Blair was pelted with eggs and shoes,
and encountered an attempted citizen's arrest for war crimes.

Since the Iraq War, Blair has been the subject of war crimes accusations.
Critics of his actions, including Bishop Desmond Tutu, Harold Pinter and
Arundhati Roy have called for his trial at the International Criminal Court.

In November 2011, a mock war-crimes tribunal created by the Kuala Lumpur War
Crimes Commission reached a unanimous conclusion that Blair and George W. Bush
are guilty of crimes against peace, crimes against humanity, and genocide as a
result of their roles in the 2003 Iraq War. The mock trial, which lasted four
days, consisting of five judges of judicial and academic backgrounds, a
court-appointed defence team in lieu of the defendants or representatives, and a
prosecution team including international law professor Francis Boyle. The mock
tribunal's finding received mixed responses, being labelled a "circus" by former
UN Special Rapporteur Param Cumaraswamy.[citation needed]

In September 2012, Desmond Tutu suggested that Blair should follow the path of
former African leaders who had been brought before the International Criminal
Court in The Hague. The human rights lawyer Geoffrey Bindman, interviewed on BBC
radio, concurred with Tutu's suggestion that there should be a war crimes trial.
In a statement made in response to Tutu's comments, Blair defended his actions.
He was supported by Lord Falconer, who stated that the war had been authorised
by United Nations Security Council Resolution 1441.

The Chilcot report after the conclusion of the Iraq Inquiry was issued on 6 July
2016 and it criticised Blair for joining the US in the war in Iraq in 2003.
Afterwards, Blair issued a statement and held a two-hour press conference to
apologise and to justify the decisions he had made in 2003 "in good faith" and
denying allegations that the war had led to a significant increase in terrorism.
He acknowledged that the report made "real and material criticisms of
preparation, planning, process and of the relationship with the United States"
but cited sections of the report that he said "should lay to rest allegations of
bad faith, lies or deceit". He stated: "whether people agree or disagree with my
decision to take military action against Saddam Hussein; I took it in good faith
and in what I believed to be the best interests of the country. ... I will take
full responsibility for any mistakes without exception or excuse. I will at the
same time say why, nonetheless, I believe that it was better to remove Saddam
Hussein and why I do not believe this is the cause of the terrorism we see today
whether in the Middle East or elsewhere in the world".

Since June 2016, Blair has called for a second referendum, a decision through
parliament or a general election to decide finally if Britain should leave the
EU. Blair stated:

Blair is concerned the 16 million voters who wanted to remain merit attention.
If the deal with the EU that is worked out means leaving is not worth while or
leaving has serious costs there should be a way of avoiding Brexit. Blair argues
remain voters believe in the 21st century leaving the largest political union
and commercial market very close to us is seriously mistaken. Blair maintains
access to the single market would involve obligations over free movement of
people and less freedom, while leaving the single market totally would involve
pain and economic consequences. Blair believes once the implications of Brexit
are understood public opinion may change. Blair also wrote: "Right now there is
one point and one point only to win: we should keep every option open, that this
should even be contentious speaks loudly about how much those of us, and after
all we were 16 million people, who believe Britain's future lies within the
European partnership, have been shoved on to the defensive.

Blair said Remain supporters are "the insurgents now", stating "we have to build
the capability to mobilise and to organise. We have to prise apart the alliance
which gave us Brexit". Blair maintains voters did not understand the
implications of a hard Brexit and wants to campaign to change voters' minds.

Blair married Cherie Booth, a Roman Catholic, who would later be named Queen's
Counsel, on 29 March 1980. They have four children: Euan, Nicholas, Kathryn, and
Leo. Leo, delivered by the Royal Surgeon/Gynaecologist Marcus Setchell, was the
first legitimate child born to a serving Prime Minister in over 150 years –
since Francis Russell was born to Lord John Russell on 11 July 1849. Blair was
criticised when it was discovered that one child had received private tuition
from staff at Westminster School.[citation needed] All four children have Irish
passports, by virtue of Blair's mother, Hazel Elizabeth Rosaleen Corscaden
(1923–1975). The family's primary residence is in Connaught Square; the Blairs
own eight residences in total.

Blair's financial assets are structured in a complicated manner, and as such
estimates of their extent vary widely. These include figures of up to £100
million; Blair has stated he is worth less than a "fifth of that". A 2015
assertion, by Francis Beckett, David Hencke and Nick Kochan, concluded that
Blair had acquired $90 million and a property portfolio worth $37.5 million in
the eight years since he had left office.

In an interview with Michael Parkinson broadcast on ITV1 on 4 March 2006, Blair
referred to the role of his Christian faith in his decision to go to war in
Iraq, stating that he had prayed about the issue, and saying that God would
judge him for his decision: "I think if you have faith about these things, you
realise that judgement is made by other people ... and if you believe in God,
it's made by God as well."

According to Alastair Campbell's diary, Blair often read the Bible before taking
any important decisions. He states that Blair had a "wobble" and considered
changing his mind on the eve of the bombing of Iraq in 1998.

A longer exploration of his faith can be found in an interview with Third Way
Magazine. There he says that "I was brought up as [a Christian], but I was not
in any real sense a practising one until I went to Oxford. There was an
Australian priest at the same college as me who got me interested again. In a
sense, it was a rediscovery of religion as something living, that was about the
world around me rather than some sort of special one-to-one relationship with a
remote Being on high. Suddenly I began to see its social relevance. I began to
make sense of the world".

At one point Alastair Campbell intervened in an interview, preventing the Prime
Minister from answering a question about his Christianity, explaining, "We don't
do God." Campbell later explained that he had intervened only to end the
interview because the journalist had been taking an excessive time, and that the
comment had just been a throwaway line.

Cherie Blair's friend and "spiritual guru" Carole Caplin is credited with
introducing her and her husband to various New Age symbols and beliefs,
including "magic pendants" known as "BioElectric Shields". The most
controversial of the Blairs' New Age practices occurred when on holiday in
Mexico. The couple, wearing only bathing costumes, took part in a rebirthing
procedure, which involved smearing mud and fruit over each other's bodies while
sitting in a steam bath.

Later on, Blair questioned the Pope's attitude towards homosexuality, arguing
that religious leaders must start "rethinking" the issue. Blair was reprimanded
by Cardinal Basil Hume in 1996 for receiving Holy Communion at Mass, while still
an Anglican, in contravention of canon law. On 22 December 2007, it was
disclosed that Blair had joined the Roman Catholic Church. The move was
described as "a private matter". He had informed Pope Benedict XVI on 23 June
2007 that he wanted to become a Catholic. The Pope and his advisors criticised
some of Blair's political actions, but followed up with a reportedly
unprecedented red-carpet welcome, which included the Cardinal Archbishop of
Westminster, Cormac Murphy-O'Connor, who would be responsible for Blair's
Catholic instruction. In 2010, The Tablet named him as one of Britain's most
influential Roman Catholics.

In 2014, Vanity Fair and The Economist published allegations that Blair had had
an extramarital affair with Wendi Deng, who was then married to Rupert Murdoch.
Blair categorically denied the allegations.

Blair made an animated cameo appearance as himself in The Simpsons episode, "The
Regina Monologues" (2003). He has also appeared as himself at the end of the
first episode of The Amazing Mrs Pritchard, a British television series about an
unknown housewife becoming Prime Minister. On 14 March 2007, Blair appeared as a
celebrity judge on Masterchef Goes Large after contestants had to prepare a
three-course meal in the Downing Street kitchens for Blair and Bertie Ahern. On
16 March 2007, Blair featured in a comedy sketch with Catherine Tate, who
appeared in the guise of her character Lauren Cooper from The Catherine Tate
Show. The sketch was made for the BBC Red Nose Day fundraising programme of
2007. During the sketch, Blair used Lauren's catchphrase "Am I bovvered?"

Michael Sheen has portrayed Blair three times, in the films The Deal (2003), The
Queen (2006), and The Special Relationship (2009). Robert Lindsay portrayed
Blair in the TV programme A Very Social Secretary (2005), and reprised the role
in The Trial of Tony Blair (2007). He was also portrayed by James Larkin in The
Government Inspector (2005), and by Ioan Gruffudd in W. (2008). In the 2006
Channel 4 comedy drama documentary, Tony Blair: Rock Star, he was portrayed by
Christian Brassington.

When Blair resigned as Prime Minister, Robert Harris, a former Fleet Street
political editor, dropped his other work to write The Ghost. The CIA-influenced
British prime minister in the book is said to be a thinly disguised version of
Blair. The novel was filmed as The Ghost Writer with Pierce Brosnan portraying
the Blair character, Adam Lang. Stephen Mangan portrays Blair in The Hunt for
Tony Blair (2011), a one-off The Comic Strip Presents... satire presented in the
style of a 1950s film noir. In the film, he is wrongly implicated in the deaths
of Robin Cook and John Smith and on the run from Inspector Hutton. In 2007, the
scenario of a possible war crimes trial for the former British prime minister
was satirised by the British broadcaster Channel 4, in a "mockumentary", The
Trial of Tony Blair, with concluded with the fictional Blair being dispatched to
the Hague.

In May 2007, before his resignation, it was speculated that Blair would be
offered a knighthood in the Order of the Thistle, owing to his Scottish
connections (rather than the Order of the Garter, which is usually offered to
former Prime Ministers). Blair reportedly indicated that he did not want the
traditional knighthood or peerage bestowed on former prime ministers.

On 22 May 2008, Blair received an honorary law doctorate from Queen's University
Belfast, alongside former Taoiseach Bertie Ahern, for distinction in public
service and roles in the Northern Ireland peace process.

On 13 January 2009, Blair was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by
President George W. Bush. Bush stated that Blair was given the award "in
recognition of exemplary achievement and to convey the utmost esteem of the
American people" and cited Blair's support for the War on Terror and his role in
achieving peace in Northern Ireland as two reasons for justifying his being
presented with the award.

On 16 February 2009, Blair was awarded the Dan David Prize by Tel Aviv
University for "exceptional leadership and steadfast determination in helping to
engineer agreements and forge lasting solutions to areas in conflict". He was
awarded the prize in May 2009.

On 13 September 2010, Blair was awarded the Liberty Medal at the National
Constitution Center in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. It was presented by former
President Bill Clinton, and is awarded annually to men and women of courage and
conviction who strive to secure the blessings of liberty to people around the
globe.

On 8 July 2010, Blair was awarded the Order of Freedom by the President of
Kosovo, Fatmir Limaj. As Blair is credited as being instrumental in ending the
conflict in Kosovo, some boys born in that country following the war have been
given the name Toni or Tonibler.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lindsay_Lohan

Lindsay Dee Lohan (born July 2, 1986) is an American actress and singer. Lohan
began her career as a child fashion model when she was three, and was later
featured on the soap opera Another World for a year when she was 10. At age 11,
Lohan made her motion picture debut in Disney's commercially and critically
successful 1998 remake of The Parent Trap. Her next major motion picture,
Disney's 2003 remake of Freaky Friday, was also a critical and commercial
success. With the release of Mean Girls (2004), another critical and commercial
success, and Disney's Herbie: Fully Loaded (2005), another commercial success,
Lohan became a teen idol sensation, a household name and a frequent focus of
paparazzi and tabloids. However, Lohan's next starring role in the romantic
comedy Just My Luck (2006), received poor reviews and was only a modest
commercial success. Following Just My Luck, Lohan focused on smaller, more
mature roles in independent movies, receiving positive comments on her work,
including A Prairie Home Companion (2006), Bobby (2006) and Chapter 27 (2007).

After recording several songs for her movie soundtracks, Lohan signed with
Casablanca Records. Lohan's debut studio album, titled Speak, was released in
December 2004 and became the first high-seller from Casablanca in several years,
selling 1 million copies in the United States alone and peaking at number four
on the Billboard 200. Though the album received mostly lukewarm reviews, it was
certified platinum and sold over 4 million copies worldwide. Lohan's second
album, titled A Little More Personal (Raw), was released in December 2005 and
featured darker material than her debut had. That album received mixed reviews,
and it was certified gold.

In 2007, two driving under the influence incidents led to Lohan being put on
probation, and together with three visits to rehabilitation facilities caused
the loss of several movie deals. In 2008 and 2009, Lohan worked as a fashion
model and launched the clothing line 6126. She resumed her acting career with TV
work in 2008, and starred in the TV film Labor Pains (2009). She appeared in
Robert Rodriguez's feature film Machete (2010). Between 2010 and 2013, Lohan
went into rehabilitation three times, and spent much of her time entangled in
legal problems stemming from misdemeanors and probation violations. In 2012 and
2013, she did further television work, including starring as Elizabeth Taylor in
the biographical TV film Liz & Dick (2012). In 2013, she starred in Paul
Schrader's independent film The Canyons. In 2014, the docu-series Lindsay aired
on the Oprah Winfrey Network, and Lohan made her stage debut in the London West
End production of Speed-the-Plow.

Lindsay Lohan was born on July 2, 1986, in The Bronx, New York City, and grew up
in Merrick and Cold Spring Harbor on Long Island, New York.[dead link] She is
the eldest child of Dina and Michael Lohan. Her father, a former Wall Street
trader, has been in trouble with the law on several occasions, while her mother
is a former singer and dancer. Lohan has three younger siblings, all of whom
have been models or actors: Michael, Jr., who appeared with Lohan in The Parent
Trap, Aliana, known as "Ali," and Dakota "Cody" Lohan. Lohan is of Irish and
Italian heritage, and she was reared as a Catholic.[dead link] Her maternal
antecedents were "well known Irish Catholic stalwarts" and her
great-grandfather, John L. Sullivan, was a co-founder of the Pro-life Party in
Long Island. Lohan attended Cold Spring Harbor High School and Sanford H.
Calhoun High School, where she did well in science and mathematics, until grade
11, when she started homeschooling.[dead link] Lohan is a natural red head.

Lohan's parents have a turbulent history. They married in 1985, separated when
she was three, and later reunited. They separated again in 2005 and finalized
their divorce in 2007.

Lohan began her career as a child model with Ford Models at the age of three.
She modeled for Calvin Klein Kids and Abercrombie, and appeared in over 60
television commercials for brands like Pizza Hut and Wendy's, as well as a
Jell-O spot with Bill Cosby. By the age of 10, when Lohan played Alexandra
"Alli" Fowler in the television soap opera Another World, Soap Opera Magazine
said she was already considered a show-business veteran.

Lohan remained in the role for a year, before leaving to star in Disney's 1998
family comedy The Parent Trap, a remake of the 1961 movie. She played dual roles
of twins, separated in infancy, who try to reunite their long-divorced parents,
played by Dennis Quaid and Natasha Richardson. The film earned $92 million
worldwide, and received largely positive reviews. Lohan received unanimous
acclaim for her debut performance. Critic Kenneth Turan called Lohan "the soul
of this film as much as Hayley Mills was of the original," going on to say that
"she is more adept than her predecessor at creating two distinct personalities."
The film won Lohan a Young Artist Award for best performance in a feature film
as well as a three-film contract with Disney. At the age of 14, Lohan played
Bette Midler's daughter in the pilot episode of the short-lived series Bette,
but she resigned her role when the production moved from New York to Los
Angeles. She also starred in two Disney television movies: Life-Size alongside
Tyra Banks in 2000, and Get a Clue in 2002.

Next Lohan starred alongside Jamie Lee Curtis in the 2003 remake of Disney's
family comedy Freaky Friday, playing a mother and daughter who switch bodies and
have to take on each other's roles. At Lohan's initiative, her character was
rewritten and changed from a Goth style to be more mainstream. Her performance
was once again met with significant praise. Critic Roger Ebert wrote that Lohan
"has that Jodie Foster sort of seriousness and intent focus beneath her teenage
persona." Freaky Friday earned Lohan the award for Breakthrough Performance at
the 2004 MTV Movie Awards and, as of 2015[update], it remained her most
commercially successful film, earning $160 million worldwide as well as an
88 percent approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes.

In 2004, Lohan had two lead roles. The first film, Disney's teen comedy
Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen, earned a domestic box office total of
$29 million, with Brandon Gray of Box Office Mojo commenting that it was "well
above expectations as it was strictly for young girls." But the film did not
meet with critical acclaim. Robert K. Elder of the Chicago Tribune wrote that
"though still a promising star, Lohan will have to do a little penance before
she's forgiven for Confessions." Her second lead role that year, in the teen
comedy Mean Girls, marked Lohan's first movie independent of Disney. Based in
part on the non-fiction book Queen Bees and Wannabes, the film stars Lohan as a
previously homeschooled 16-year-old learning to navigate the social cliques of a
public high school. It was a critical and commercial success, grossing
$129 million worldwide and, according to Brandon Gray, "cementing her status as
the new teen movie queen." Mick LaSalle from the San Francisco Chronicle wrote
that "Lohan is sensitive and appealing, a solid locus for audience sympathy."
David Rooney from Variety said that "Lohan displays plenty of charm, verve and
deft comic timing." Lohan received four awards at the 2004 Teen Choice Awards
for Freaky Friday and Mean Girls, including Breakout Movie Star. Mean Girls also
earned her two awards at the 2005 MTV Movie Awards. With Mean Girls, Lohan's
public profile was raised significantly. Vanity Fair described how she became a
household name. Paparazzi began following her and her love life and partying
became frequent targets of gossip sites and the tabloid media. Following Mean
Girls, which was scripted by former "Not Ready For Prime Time Actress" Tina Fey
and featured several other veterans of Saturday Night Live's "Not Ready For
Prime Time Company," Lohan hosted the show three times between 2004 and 2006. In
2004, when Lohan was 17, she became the youngest host of the MTV Movie Awards
and in 2006 she hosted the 2006 World Music Awards.

Lohan returned to Disney in 2005, starring in the comedy Herbie: Fully Loaded,
the fifth film in the series with the anthropomorphic car Herbie. Fully Loaded
earned $144 million worldwide, but it received mixed reviews. Stephen Holden of
The New York Times called Lohan "a genuine star who ... seems completely at home
on the screen", while James Berardinelli wrote that "as bright a starlet as she
may be, Lohan ends up playing second fiddle to the car." While shooting the film
in 2004, Lohan was hospitalized with a kidney infection brought on by stress in
her personal life and from recording her first album while the film was in
production, prompting Vanity Fair to label it Lohan's "first disastrous shoot.".
She also guest-starred in an episode of That '70s Show, of whose cast Wilmer
Valderrama, her boyfriend at the time, was a regular member. According to Vanity
Fair, the breakup with Valderrama contributed to Lohan's issues during the
Herbie shoot. In 2005, Lohan became the first person to have a My Scene
celebrity doll released by Mattel. She also voiced herself in the animated
direct-to-DVD film My Scene Goes Hollywood, based on the series of dolls.

Following Mean Girls, Lohan spent several years living out of hotels in Los
Angeles, of which two years were spent at the infamous Chateau Marmont, where
comedy actor John Belushi, himself a former "Not Ready For Prime Time Actor,"
had died. In late 2007, after settling down in a more permanent residence, she
explained that she "didn't want to be alone" but that "it wasn't a way of life
... not very consistent." She had a series of car accidents that were widely
reported, in August 2004, October 2005, and November 2006, when she suffered
minor injuries because a paparazzo who was following her for a photograph hit
her car.

Lohan's next widely released film, the romantic comedy Just My Luck, opened in
May 2006 and, according to Variety, earned her over $7 million. The opening
weekend box office takings of $5.7 million "broke lead actress Lindsay Lohan's
winning streak" according to Brandon Gray. The film received poor reviews and
earned Lohan her first Golden Raspberry nomination for Worst Actress. Following
Just My Luck, Lohan focused on smaller roles in more mature, independent movies.
Robert Altman's ensemble comedy A Prairie Home Companion, based on humorist
Garrison Keillor's works, in which Lohan co-stars with Meryl Streep and Lily
Tomlin, had a limited release in June 2006. Peter Travers wrote for Rolling
Stone that "Lohan rises to the occasion, delivering a rock-the-house version of
'Frankie and Johnny.'" Co-star Streep said of Lohan's acting: "She's in command
of the art form" and "completely, visibly living in front of the camera." The
Emilio Estevez ensemble drama Bobby, about the hours leading up to the Robert F.
Kennedy assassination, was released in theaters in November 2006. Lohan received
favorable comments for her performance, particularly a scene alongside Sharon
Stone. As part of the Bobby ensemble cast, Lohan was nominated for a Screen
Actors Guild Award. In 2006, Lohan attended Alcoholics Anonymous meetings.

Lohan's next appearance was in Chapter 27 as a John Lennon fan who befriends
Mark David Chapman, played by Jared Leto, on the day he murders Lennon. Filming
finished in early 2006, but the film was not released until March 2008 due to
difficulties in finding a distributor. In May 2007, the drama Georgia Rule was
released. In the film, Lohan portrays an out-of-control teenager whose mother
(Felicity Huffman) brings her to the house of her own estranged mother (Jane
Fonda). Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly wrote that "Lohan hits a true
note of spiteful princess narcissism." During filming in 2006, Lohan was
hospitalized, her representative saying "she was overheated and dehydrated." At
the time Lohan was going through a breakup with Hard Rock Cafe heir Harry
Morton, which contributed to her problems on the set, according to Allure. In a
letter that was made public, studio executive James G. Robinson called Lohan
"irresponsible and unprofessional." He mentioned "various late arrivals and
absences from the set" and said that "we are well aware that your ongoing all
night heavy partying is the real reason for your so-called 'exhaustion.'" In
2007, Lohan was cast in the film Poor Things. But in May of that year, she was
arrested on a charge of driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI.) The film's
producers initially voiced support, and production was put on hold, as Lohan
entered the Promises Treatment Center rehabilitation facility where she stayed
for 45 days. She ultimately lost the Poor Things part. In July, less than two
weeks out of rehab, Lohan was arrested a second time on charges of possession of
cocaine, driving under the influence and driving with a suspended license. In
August, Lohan pleaded guilty to misdemeanor cocaine use and driving under the
influence and was sentenced to an alcohol education program, community service,
one day in jail, and was given three years probation. Lohan released a statement
in which she said "it is clear to me that my life has become completely
unmanageable because I am addicted to alcohol and drugs." The same month she
entered the Cirque Lodge Treatment Center in Sundance, Utah for a third stint at
rehabilitation, staying for three months until her discharge in October. In
November Lohan served 84 minutes in jail. A sheriff spokesman cited overcrowding
and the nonviolent nature of the crime as reasons for the reduced sentence.

In early January 2007, production on the film I Know Who Killed Me was put on
hold when Lohan underwent appendix surgery. Lohan admitted herself to the
Wonderland Center rehabilitation facility for a 30-day stay, though she
continued shooting the film, returning to the facility at night. Shortly
thereafter, Lohan withdrew from a film adaptation of Oscar Wilde's A Woman of No
Importance, her publicist stating that Lohan needed to "focus on getting
better." Lohan was replaced in The Edge of Love in April 2007, shortly before
filming was to begin, with the director citing "insurance reasons" and Lohan
later explaining that she "was going through a really bad time then."

In the wake of her second DUI arrest, Lohan withdrew from a scheduled appearance
on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno in which she had been due to promote I Know
Who Killed Me, a low-budget psychological horror-thriller in which she stars as
a stripper with a dual personality. The film premiered in July 2007 to what
Entertainment Weekly called "an abysmal $3.5 million." It earned Lohan dual
Golden Raspberry awards for Worst Actress, with Lohan coming first and second,
tying with herself. Hollywood executives and industry insiders commented that it
would be difficult for Lohan to find employment until she could prove that she
was sober and reliable, citing possible issues with securing insurance.

In May 2008, Lohan made her first screen appearance since I Know Who Killed Me,
on ABC's television series Ugly Betty. She guest starred in four episodes as
Kimmie Keegan, an old schoolmate of the protagonist Betty Suarez. Articles about
Lohan have appeared in various men's magazines. She was voted No. 10 on the list
of "100 Sexiest Women" by readers of FHM in 2005, No.13 in 2006, No.30 in 2007,
and No.41 in 2008, while Maxim placed her third on its "Hot 100" list in 2006
and first in 2007. Lohan has been the face of Jill Stuart, Miu Miu, and Dooney &
Bourke, as well as the 2008 Visa Swap British fashion campaign. She was also the
face of Italian clothing company Fornarina for its Spring/Summer 2009 campaign.
Lohan has a long-lasting fascination with Marilyn Monroe going back to when she
saw Niagara during The Parent Trap shoot. In the 2008 Spring Fashion edition of
New York magazine, Lohan re-created Monroe's final photo shoot, known as The
Last Sitting, including nudity, saying that the photo shoot was "an honor." The
New York Times critic Ginia Bellafante found it disturbing, saying "the pictures
ask viewers to engage in a kind of mock necrophilia. ... [and] the photographs
bear none of Monroe's fragility." In 2008, Lohan launched a clothes line, whose
name 6126 was designed to represent Monroe's birth date (June 1, 1926). The line
started with leggings, before expanding to a full collection, covering 280
pieces as of April 2010[update]. In April 2009, Lohan released a self-tanning
spray under the brand name Sevin Nyne in collaboration with Sephora. In
September 2009, Lohan became an artistic adviser for the French fashion house
Emanuel Ungaro. A collection by designer Estrella Archs with Lohan as adviser
was presented in October, receiving a "disastrous" reception, according to
Entertainment Weekly and New York. Lohan left the company in March 2010.

In the comedy Labor Pains, Lohan plays a woman who pretends to be pregnant.
During the shoot, Lohan's manager worked with the paparazzi to encourage the
media to show her working, as opposed to partying. It was originally planned for
a theatrical release, but instead appeared as a TV movie on the ABC Family cable
channel in July 2009, "a setback for the star" according to Variety. The
premiere received 2.1 million viewers, "better-than-average" for the channel
according to E! Online. Alessandra Stanley of The New York Times wrote that
"this is not a triumphant return of a prodigal child star. ... [Labor Pains]
never shakes free of the heavy baggage Ms. Lohan brings to the role." Lohan was
a guest judge on US TV style contest Project Runway sixth-season premiere
episode, which aired in August 2009.

In October 2009, Lohan's DUI probation was extended by an additional year,
following several instances in which she failed to attend the court-ordered
substance abuse treatment classes.

Lohan narrated and presented the British television documentary Lindsay Lohan's
Indian Journey, about human trafficking in India. It was filmed during a week in
India in December 2009, and transmitted on BBC Three in April 2010. The BBC was
criticized for having hired Lohan, and while reviewers called the documentary
compelling, they also found Lohan's presence to be odd and distracting. Lohan
said: "I hope my presence in India will bring awareness to the really important
issues raised in making this film." In April 2010, Lohan was let go from the
film The Other Side where she had been set to star, with the director saying she
was "not bankable." In May 2010, Lohan traveled to the Cannes Film Festival to
promote the biographical drama Inferno. She was set to star as the lead,
adult-film performer Linda Lovelace, but was later replaced while in court
mandated rehab. Because she was in Cannes, Lohan missed a mandatory DUI progress
hearing. A bench warrant was issued for her arrest which was rescinded after she
posted bail. A judge determined that Lohan had violated the terms of her
probation by missing several mandatory classes and meetings. She was sentenced
to 90 days in jail, followed by 90 days of inpatient rehab treatment. However,
Lohan served only 14 days of the jail sentence, due to overcrowding. She then
entered an inpatient rehabilitation facility, from where she was released after
only 23 days.

In June 2010, Lohan was the subject of a fashion shoot in the photographer
docu-series Double Exposure on Bravo. Robert Rodriguez's action exploitation
film Machete opened in September 2010. In the film, Lohan's character takes
drugs, is naked in much of her appearance, and later dons a nun's habit while
toting a machine gun. Its critical reviews were mixed. The Washington Post
described her character as "a campier, trampier version of herself – or at least
her tabloid image." Premiere.com said she was "terrible" while Variety called it
"her best work in some time." Because of her rehabilitation and legal
engagements, Lohan did not participate in promotion of the movie. Lohan filmed a
sketch where she is dressed as Marilyn Monroe for Inappropriate Comedy in 2010.
The film had issues finding a distributor and was not released until 2013, when
it was met with poor box office and critical reception. Lohan appeared on the
October 2010 cover of Vanity Fair. She told the magazine: "I want my career
back" and "I know that I'm a damn good actress."

In September 2010, Lohan's probation was revoked following a failed drug test.
She spent part of the day in jail before being released on bail. A few days
later, she entered the Betty Ford Center, a drug and alcohol treatment center,
where she remained on court order for three months until early January 2011. In
February 2011, Lohan was charged with the theft of a necklace reported stolen
from a jewelry store the month before. She was sentenced to community service
and 120 days in jail for misdemeanor theft and probation violation, to which she
pleaded no contest. Due to jail overcrowding, Lohan served the sentence under
house confinement, wearing a tracking ankle monitor for 35 days. In November,
Lohan was found to have violated the terms of her probation by failing to
perform the required community service. She was sentenced to additional
community service and 30 days in jail, of which she served less than 5 hours due
to overcrowding.

Lohan appeared in the January/February 2012 issue of Playboy magazine, in a
shoot inspired by a nude pictorial of Marilyn Monroe from the first issue of the
magazine. Editor Hugh Hefner said Lohan's issue was "breaking sales records."
Lohan had not appeared on Saturday Night Live since 2006, when she hosted the
show for the fourth time in March 2012. Her appearance received mixed to
negative reviews. Critics appreciated the self-deprecating references to her
personal troubles, but also commented that she largely played a supporting role.
The episode had the second highest ratings of the season with 7.4 million
viewers. In May 2012, Lohan appeared briefly, as a celebrity judge, on the
television series Glee, in the episode "Nationals." Lohan stars as a surfer in
the art film First Point by artist Richard Phillips. It debuted at Art Basel in
June 2012 and features a score by Thomas Bangalter from Daft Punk. Comments from
critics on Lohan's work were mixed.

Lohan starred as Elizabeth Taylor in the biographical made-for-TV movie Liz &
Dick, which premiered on the Lifetime cable channel in November 2012. Reviews of
Lohan's performance were largely, but not unanimously, negative. The Hollywood
Reporter said she was "woeful" while Variety called her "adequate."
Entertainment Weekly described the premiere ratings of 3.5 millions as "a little
soft." On way to the Liz & Dick set in June 2012, Lohan was in a car accident,
where she sustained minor injuries and which caused a delay in production.
During the production, paramedics were called to Lohan's hotel room, treating
her for exhaustion and dehydration.

In March 2013, Lohan pleaded no contest to misdemeanor charges stemming from the
June 2012 car accident; reckless driving and providing false information to a
police officer. She was sentenced to community service, psychotherapy and
lockdown rehabilitation. Her probation was also extended for another two years.
Between May and July 2013 Lohan spent 90 days in rehabilitation.

In April 2013, the horror comedy Scary Movie 5 was released, where Lohan appears
as herself alongside Charlie Sheen in the opening sketch. While the movie itself
was panned by critics, a few reviewers found Lohan's and Sheen's to be one of
the better scenes. The same month Lohan guest-starred as herself in an episode
of Sheen's comedy series Anger Management.

In August 2013, just days after Lohan left rehab, The Canyons was released, an
independent erotic thriller directed by Paul Schrader and written by Bret Easton
Ellis. It was made on a low budget, most of which was gathered through online
fund raiser Kickstarter. Lohan received $100 a day and a share of the profits,
and she was also credited as a co-producer. The New York Times Magazine
described Lohan as difficult to work with, and the shoot as fraught with
conflict between Lohan and Schrader. Lohan and her co-star, adult-film actor
James Deen, portray an actress and a producer in a volatile relationship.
Reviews for the film were generally poor, but several critics praised Lohan's
performance. The New Yorker said she was "overwrought and unfocused" while
Variety called her "very affecting" and Salon described her as "almost
incandescent." The same month Lohan filled in for Chelsea Handler as host of the
cable talk show Chelsea Lately. She received mostly positive reviews for her
appearance and the show garnered its best ratings of the year.

The 8-part docu-series Lindsay was transmitted in March and April 2014 on Oprah
Winfrey's OWN cable network. The series followed Lohan's life and work as she
moved to New York City after leaving rehab. In the final episode, Lohan said
that she had had a miscarriage which had interrupted filming of the series. The
premiere had 693,000 viewers, described as "so-so" by The Hollywood Reporter.
The ratings then slipped and the finale only had 406,000 viewers. New York Daily
News called the series "surprisingly routine," Variety described it as boring,
while Liz Smith said it was "compelling" and "usually painful to watch." In
April 2014, Lohan guest-starred in an episode of the CBS sitcom 2 Broke Girls.In
July 2014, she filed a lawsuit against Rockstar Games claiming elements in the
video game Grand Theft Auto V were influenced by her image, voice and clothing
line without permission. Rockstar responded in court papers that sought a
dismissal of the case, saying that the case was frivolous and filed for
publicity purposes.

Lohan made her stage debut in October 2014, starring in the London West End
production of David Mamet's Speed-the-Plow, a satire about the movie business.
She portrayed Karen, the secretary of a Hollywood executive, in a role
originally played by Madonna. Reviews of Lohan's performance were mixed, with
the Associated Press describing critical reception overall as "lukewarm." The
Stage said she was "out of her league" while The Times wrote that she "can act a
bit" and The Guardian said she "holds the stage with ease." In December 2014,
the free-to-play video game app Lindsay Lohan’s The Price of Fame was released
for the iOS and Android operating systems. Polygon said it was "funny, trashy
and surprisingly self-aware" while Vulture called it "a crappy knockoff of Kim
Kardashian: Hollywood." In May 2015, a judge ended Lohan's probation after she
completed the community service that resulted from her 2012 reckless driving,
making it the first time in nearly 8 years that she was probation free.

Lohan had planned on releasing an album in the summer of 2001, according to her
official website, llrocks.com. No album was released in 2001, but Lohan had
begun recording demo tracks with Emilio Estefan, Jr.. He and his wife, Gloria
Estefan, signed Lohan to a five-album production deal in September 2002. "I am
extremely excited to be working with Emilio. I am surrounded by a group of very
talented people whom have made me feel like part of their family," Lohan said to
the press. Also in September, Lohan landed the role as the daughter in Disney's
remake, Freaky Friday, which required her to learn how to play the guitar and to
sing. Lohan recorded a song for the film, "Ultimate," which was released to
Radio Disney to help promote the film. The song peaked at #18 on Radio Disney's
Top 30. Lohan announced that the song was separate from her singing career,
since many teen idols such as Hilary Duff and Raven-Symoné were expanding their
careers from acting to singing. In 2003, Lohan recorded four songs including a
Radio Disney hit, "Drama Queen (That Girl)," that were released for the
soundtrack to Lohan's film, Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen.

Lohan began writing the tracks on her album in April 2004. "I write a lot of
lyrics and I'm involved in the producing process, because it's like, if I'm
singing it, I want it to be something that I can relate to," Lohan said. "I'm
just trying to feel it out and see where it goes. I'm playing guitar and I also
love to dance, so [the music will be] somewhere along the lines of hip-hop and
rock." She had begun working with Diane Warren and Randy Jackson, who were going
to help write and produce her album. Diane Warren wrote the song, "I Decide,"
for Lohan which was originally going to be on her album. When Lohan decided not
to collaborate with Warren and Jackson, "I Decide" was instead released on the
soundtrack to the film The Princess Diaries 2: Royal Engagement and on to Radio
Disney.

Lohan's debut album, Speak, was released in the United States on December 7,
2004. The album was the first high-seller from Casablanca Records in several
years, selling 1,000,000 units in the United States. The album received mostly
negative reviews, with critics commenting that Lohan "isn't a bad singer, but
not an extraordinary singer either." In the United States, the album peaked at
number four on the Billboard 200, selling 261,762 copies in its first week. In
Germany the album debuted at the #53 position and took four weeks to complete
its chart run. The first two singles from Speak, "Rumors" and "Over," were both
successes, with "Over" topping the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles where it
stayed for three weeks. The song also did well internationally in countries such
as Australia, Ireland, and the United Kingdom. "Rumors" peaked at #6 on the
Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart and also did well in Australia and Germany,
where it reached #14. The music video for "Rumors" was nominated for "Best Pop
Video" at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards. Both songs received heavy airplay on
MTV's Total Request Live. The final single, "First," was released to help
promote Lohan's film, Herbie: Fully Loaded. The song earned small success in
Australia and Germany. Lohan promoted the album by performing the songs in a
number of live appearances. Plans for a tour in Taiwan were planned, but were
later scrapped.

Lohan's second album, A Little More Personal (Raw), was released in December
2005. It peaked at number 20 on the Billboard 200 chart, and was eventually
certified Gold. Lohan co-wrote most of the songs on the album, which received a
mixed critical response. Slant Magazine called it "contrived ... for all the
so-called weighty subject matter, there's not much meat on these bones." Lohan
herself directed the music video for the album's only single, "Confessions of a
Broken Heart (Daughter to Father)," which features her sister Ali Lohan. The
video is a dramatization of the pain Lohan said her family suffered at the hands
of her father. It was her first song to chart on the Billboard Hot 100, peaking
at number 57.

Following a switch to Universal Motown, Lohan began working on a third album,
tentatively titled Spirit in the Dark, in late 2007. In May 2008, the single
"Bossy" was released onto digital outlets, which reached number one on the US
Billboard Hot Dance Club Play chart. The single was meant to serve as the lead
single from the album. Later that year, Lohan said that work on the album had
stalled and that she wanted to avoid the stress of working on movies and music
at the same time.

In 2015, the English band Duran Duran announced that Lohan had been featured on
the song "Dancephobia" from their upcoming fourteenth studio album, Paper Gods.
In June 2016, Lohan confirmed her intentions for recording and releasing her
third studio album during an online video chat with her fans. Lohan confirmed
that she owed her record label one final album, as per her contract, and would
only release music once it would not upset her younger sister, Ali, who is also
pursuing her own music career.

In July 2007, Lohan's home was burgled by the Bling Ring, a group of
fashion-motivated burglars whose ringleader considered Lohan to be their
ultimate conquest. Video surveillance of the burglary recorded at Lohan's home
played a large role in breaking the case.

During the 2008 US presidential campaign, Lohan offered her services to Barack
Obama's Democratic election effort, but was declined. In a blog post, Lohan
criticized the media and then Republican Vice Presidential candidate Sarah Palin
for not focusing on policy, and she described Palin as homophobic and
anti-choice. Lohan had previously expressed an interest in going to Iraq, during
the Iraq War in 2006, on a USO tour with Hillary Clinton. In the 2012
presidential election, Lohan supported Republican candidate Mitt Romney,
something that prompted ABC News to call her a "political turncoat". Only weeks
later, she tweeted words supportive of Obama.

Speaking about her sexual orientation, Lohan said that she was not a lesbian.
When asked if she was bisexual in 2008, she responded "Maybe. Yeah," adding, "I
don't want to classify myself." However, in a 2013 interview, she said, "I know
I’m straight. I have made out with girls before, and I had a relationship with a
girl. ... I think I was looking for something different."

In 2014, Lohan became involved in Brazilian politics. She tweeted to 8.5 million
followers: "Brasil needs change and I support Aecio Neves!", which has since
been deleted, as has the Facebook post.

In April 2016, it was reported that Lohan was studying Islam after she was
spotted carrying a copy of the Quran; Lohan confirmed the reports herself.

On October 3, 2016, it was revealed that Lohan was in a grisly boating accident
when half of her ring finger on her right hand was severed during an incident
with the boat's anchor. The finger part was recovered and reattached at
hospital. She did a Snapchat picture of it in its finger cast.

On January 17, 2017, rumors were spread that Lohan had converted to Islam after
she deleted all her Instagram posts and left one message that read "Alaikum
salam" – Arabic for "Peace be unto you." Many Muslim social media users
congratulated her and welcomed her into the faith. However, her mother Dina
Lohan said that she is simply taking a break from social media and opted to post
a message in Arabic.

On February 21, 2017, she claimed she was “racially profiled” at London Heathrow
Airport while going through a security checkpoint wearing a headscarf.

Lohan reportedly dated fellow teen star Aaron Carter between 2000 and 2001. The
relationship garnered media attention with reports of a love triangle between
Lohan, Carter, and actress and singer Hilary Duff. Lohan began dating actor
Wilmer Valderrama in 2004. She also guest-starred in an episode of That '70s
Show, where Valderrama was a regular. After their break-up, Lohan wrote her
second single, "Over", about the experience. Lohan dated Hard Rock Cafe heir
Harry Morton in 2006. In May 2007, Lohan dated British TV personality Calum
Best. While in rehab in July 2008, Lohan met and dated snowboarder Riley Giles.
Lohan dated DJ Samantha Ronson in 2008 and 2009. She co-hosted club events with
Ronson and accompanied her when she was DJ-ing. In April 2009, following her
breakup with Ronson, Lohan appeared in a dating video spoof on the comedy
website Funny or Die. It was viewed 2.7 million times in the first week and
received favorable comments from the media. As of 2016, her love interest and
fiance was London based Russian millionaire Egor Tarabasov, a real estate agency
owner, called Home House Estates and son of Dmitry Tarabasov.

Lohan spoke about her turbulent childhood in 2007, the same year her parents
finalised their divorce: "I feel like a second parent in the sense that I helped
raise my family...I was put between my mother and father a lot." Despite the
conflicts, Lohan spoke very fondly of her family. However, in 2007, 2008, and
2009 she admitted that she had cut off contact with her father, describing his
behavior as unpredictable and hard to deal with.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FC_Bayern_Munich

Fußball-Club Bayern München e.V., commonly known as FC Bayern München (German
pronunciation: [ʔɛf tseː ˈbaɪɐn ˈmʏnçn̩]), FCB, Bayern Munich, or FC Bayern, is
a German sports club based in Munich, Bavaria (Bayern), Germany. It is best
known for its professional football team, which plays in the Bundesliga, the top
tier of the German football league system, and is the most successful club in
German football history, having won a record 26 national titles and 18 national
cups.

FC Bayern was founded in 1900 by 11 football players, led by Franz John.
Although Bayern won its first national championship in 1932, the club was not
selected for the Bundesliga at its inception in 1963. The club had its period of
greatest success in the middle of the 1970s when, under the captaincy of Franz
Beckenbauer, it won the European Cup three times in a row (1974–1976). Overall,
Bayern has reached ten European Cup/UEFA Champions League finals, most recently
winning their fifth title in 2013 as part of a continental treble. Bayern has
also won one UEFA Cup, one European Cup Winners' Cup, one UEFA Super Cup, one
FIFA Club World Cup and two Intercontinental Cups, making it one of the most
successful European clubs internationally. Since the formation of the
Bundesliga, Bayern has been the dominant club in German football with 26 titles
and has won 8 of the last 12 titles. They have traditional local rivalries with
1860 Munich and 1. FC Nürnberg, as well as with Borussia Dortmund since the
mid-1990s.

Since the beginning of the 2005–06 season, Bayern has played its home games at
the Allianz Arena. Previously the team had played at Munich's Olympiastadion for
33 years. The team colours are red and white, and the team crest shows the white
and blue flag of Bavaria. In terms of revenue, Bayern Munich is the biggest
sports club in Germany and the third biggest football club in the world,
generating €488 million for the 2013–14 season. As of November 2016, Bayern has
over 284,000 members. There are more than 4,000 officially-registered fan clubs
with over 314,000 members. The club has other departments for chess, handball,
basketball, gymnastics, bowling, table tennis and senior football with more than
1,100 active members.

FC Bayern is ranked second in the current UEFA club coefficient rankings and
fourth in IFFHS's latest IFFHS Club World Ranking.

FC Bayern Munich was founded by members of a Munich gymnastics club (MTV 1879).
When a congregation of members of MTV 1879 decided on 27 February 1900 that the
footballers of the club would not be allowed to join the German Football
Association (DFB), 11 members of the football division left the congregation and
on the same evening founded Fußball-Club Bayern München. Within a few months,
Bayern achieved high-scoring victories against all local rivals, including a
15–0 win against FC Nordstern, and reached the semi-finals of the 1900–01 South
German championship. In the following years, the club won some local trophies
and in 1910–11 Bayern joined the newly founded "Kreisliga", the first regional
Bavarian league. The club won this league in its first year, but did not win it
again until the beginning of World War I in 1914, which halted all football
activities in Germany.

In the years after the war, Bayern won several regional competitions before
winning its first South German championship in 1926, an achievement repeated two
years later. Its first national title was gained in 1932, when coach Richard
"Little Dombi" Kohn led the team to the German championship by defeating
Eintracht Frankfurt 2–0 in the final.

The advent of Nazism put an abrupt end to Bayern's development. Club president
Kurt Landauer and the coach, both of whom were Jewish, left the country. Many
others in the club were also purged. Bayern was taunted as the "Jew's club",
while local rival 1860 Munich gained much support. Josef Sauter, who was
inaugurated 1943, was the only NSDAP member as president. As some Bayern players
greeted Landauer, who was watching a friendly in Switzerland lead to continued
discrimination. Bayern was also affected by the ruling that football players had
to be full amateurs again. In the following years, Bayern could not sustain its
role of contender for the national title, achieving mid-table results in its
regional league instead.

After the war, Bayern became a member of the Oberliga Süd, the southern
conference of the German first division, which was split five ways at that time.
Bayern struggled, hiring and firing 13 coaches between 1945 and 1963. Landauer
returned from exile in 1947 and was once again appointed club president, the
tenure lasted until 1951. He remains as the club's president with the longest
accumulated tenure. Landauer has been deemed as inventor of Bayern as a
professional club and his memory is e.g. being upheld by the Bayern ultras
Schickeria. In 1955, the club was relegated but returned to the Oberliga in the
following season and won the DFB-Pokal for the first time, beating Fortuna
Düsseldorf 1–0 in the final. The club struggled financially though, verging on
bankruptcy at the end of the 1950s. Manufacturer Roland Endler provided the
necessary funds and was rewarded with four years at the helm of the club. In
1963, the Oberligas in Germany were consolidated into one national league, the
Bundesliga. Five teams from the Oberliga South were admitted. Bayern finished
third in that year's southern division, but another Munich team, 1860 Munich,
had won the championship. As the DFB preferred not to include two teams from one
city, Bayern was not chosen for the Bundesliga. They gained promotion two years
later, fielding a team with young talents like Franz Beckenbauer, Gerd Müller
and Sepp Maier — who would later be collectively referred to as the axis.

In their first Bundesliga season, Bayern finished third and also won the
DFB-Pokal. This qualified them for the following year's European Cup Winners'
Cup, which they won in a dramatic final against Scottish club Rangers, when
Franz Roth scored the decider in a 1–0 extra time victory. In 1967, Bayern
retained the DFB-Pokal, but slow overall progress saw Branko Zebec take over as
coach. He replaced Bayern's offensive style of play with a more disciplined
approach, and in doing so achieved the first league and cup double in Bundesliga
history in 1969. Bayern Munich are one of four German clubs to win the
Bundesliga and DFB-Pokal in the same season along with Borussia Dortmund, 1. FC
Köln and Werder Bremen. Zebec used only 13 players throughout the season.

Udo Lattek took charge in 1970. After winning the DFB-Pokal in his first season,
Lattek led Bayern to their third German championship. The deciding match in the
1971–72 season against Schalke 04 was the first match in the new Olympiastadion,
and was also the first live televised match in Bundesliga history. Bayern beat
Schalke 5–1 and thus claimed the title, also setting several records, including
points gained and goals scored. Bayern also won the next two championships, but
the zenith was their triumph in the 1974 European Cup Final against Atlético
Madrid, which Bayern won 4–0 after a replay. This title – after winning the Cup
Winners' trophy 1967 and two semi-finals (1968 and 1972) in that competition –
marked the club's breakthrough as a force on the international stage. During the
following years, the team was unsuccessful domestically but defended their
European title by defeating Leeds United in the 1975 European Cup Final when
Roth and Müller secured victory with late goals. "We came back into the game and
scored two lucky goals, so in the end we were the winners but we were very, very
lucky", stated Franz Beckenbauer. Billy Bremner believed the French referee was
"very suspicious". Leeds fans then rioted in Paris and were banned from European
football for three years. A year later in Glasgow, Saint-Étienne were defeated
by another Roth goal and Bayern became the third club to win the trophy in three
consecutive years. The final trophy won by Bayern in this era was the
Intercontinental Cup, in which they defeated Brazilian club Cruzeiro over two
legs. The rest of the decade was a time of change and saw no further titles for
Bayern. In 1977, Franz Beckenbauer left for New York Cosmos and, in 1979, Sepp
Maier and Uli Hoeneß retired while Gerd Müller joined the Fort Lauderdale
Strikers. Bayerndusel was coined during this period as an expression of either
contempt or envy about the sometimes narrow and last-minute wins against other
teams.

The 1980s were a period of off-field turmoil for Bayern, with many changes in
personnel and financial problems. On the field, Paul Breitner and Karl-Heinz
Rummenigge, termed FC Breitnigge, led the team to Bundesliga titles in 1980 and
1981. Apart from a DFB-Pokal win in 1982, two relatively unsuccessful seasons
followed, after which Breitner retired and former coach Udo Lattek returned.
Bayern won the DFB-Pokal in 1984 and went on to win five Bundesliga
championships in six seasons, including a double in 1986. European success,
however, was elusive during the decade; Bayern managed to claim the runners-up
spot in the European Cup in 1982 and 1987.

Jupp Heynckes was hired as coach in 1987, but after two consecutive
championships in 1988–89 and 1989–90, Bayern's form dipped. After finishing
second in 1990–91, the club finished just five points above the relegation
places in 1991–92. In 1993–94, Bayern was eliminated in the UEFA Cup second
round to Premier League side Norwich City, who remain the only English club to
beat Bayern at the Olympiastadion. Success returned when Franz Beckenbauer took
over for the second half of the 1993–94 season, winning the championship again
after a four-year gap. Beckenbauer was then appointed club president.

His successors as coach, Giovanni Trapattoni and Otto Rehhagel, both finished
trophyless after a season, not meeting the club's high expectations. During this
time, Bayern's players frequently appeared in the gossip pages of the press
rather than the sports pages, resulting in the nickname FC Hollywood. Franz
Beckenbauer briefly returned at the end of the 1995–96 season as caretaker coach
and led his team to victory in the UEFA Cup, beating Bordeaux in the final. For
the 1996–97 season, Trapattoni returned to win the championship. In the
following season, Bayern lost the title to newly promoted 1. FC Kaiserslautern
and Trapattoni had to take his leave for the second time.

After his success at Borussia Dortmund, Bayern were coached by Ottmar Hitzfeld
from 1998 to 2004. In Hitzfeld's first season, Bayern won the Bundesliga and
came close to winning the Champions League, losing 2–1 to Manchester United into
injury time after leading for most of the match. The following year, in the
club's centenary season, Bayern won the third league and cup double in its
history. A third consecutive Bundesliga title followed in 2001, won with a
stoppage time goal on the final day of the league season. Days later, Bayern won
the Champions League for the fourth time after a 25-year gap, defeating Valencia
on penalties. The 2001–02 season began with a win in the Intercontinental Cup,
but ended trophyless otherwise. In 2002–03, Bayern won their fourth double,
leading the league by a record margin of 16 points. Hitzfeld's reign ended in
2004, with Bayern underperforming, including defeat by second division Alemannia
Aachen in the DFB-Pokal.

Felix Magath took over and led Bayern to two consecutive doubles. Prior to the
start of the 2005–06 season, Bayern moved from the Olympiastadion to the new
Allianz Arena, which the club shares with 1860 Munich. On the field, their
performance in 2006–07 was erratic. Trailing in the league and having lost to
Alemannia Aachen in the cup yet again, coach Magath was sacked shortly after the
winter break.

Hitzfeld returned as trainer in January 2007, but Bayern finished the 2006–07
season in fourth position, thus failing to qualify for the Champions League for
the first time in more than a decade. Additional losses in the DFB-Pokal and the
DFB-Ligapokal left the club with no honours for the season.

For the 2007–08 season, Bayern made drastic squad changes to help rebuild. They
signed a total of eight new players and sold, released or loaned out nine of
their players. Among new signings were 2006 World Cup stars such as Franck
Ribéry, Miroslav Klose and Luca Toni. Bayern went on to win the Bundesliga,
being on top of the standings on every single week of play, and the DFB-Pokal
against Borussia Dortmund.

On 11 January 2008, Jürgen Klinsmann was named as Hitzfeld's successor, taking
charge on 1 July 2008 after signing a two-year contract. Bayern Munich lost the
DFL-Supercup 1–2 against Borussia Dortmund in 2008 then was eliminated by Bayer
Leverkusen in the quarter-finals of the DFB-Pokal. In the Champions League
Bayern also reached the quarter-finals after winning Group F and defeating
Sporting CP in the first knockout round, achieving a Champions League record
aggregate of 12–1. On 27 April, two days after a home defeat against Schalke 04
which saw Bayern drop to the third place in the table, Klinsmann was fired.
Former trainer Jupp Heynckes was named as caretaker until the end of the season.
Bayern eventually finished second, thus qualifying directly for the Champions
League in 2009–10.

Bayern then signed Dutch manager Louis van Gaal for the 2009–10 season.
Multi-million signings of Arjen Robben and Mario Gómez also followed in a bid to
return Bayern to the top of the European scene. On 8 May 2010, Bayern Munich won
the 2009–10 Bundesliga after a 3–1 win at Hertha BSC. Bayern then won the
DFB-Pokal on 15 May 2010 to secure the domestic double. Bayern also reached the
2010 Champions League final, but were beaten 2–0 by Inter Milan, failing to
become the first German club to complete the treble.

In the 2010–11 season, Bayern were eliminated in the first round of the
Champions League knockout phase by Inter Milan on the away goals rule and
finished third in the Bundesliga. Van Gaal was fired by Bayern in April 2011.

In the 2011–12 season, Heynckes returned to coach Bayern for a second permanent
spell but the team was to end the season without a trophy for the second season
running. Domestically they finished second in the Bundesliga and lost the
DFB-Pokal final 2–5, both times finishing runner-up to Borussia Dortmund. They
also reached the final of the Champions League in their home stadium, but lost
to Chelsea on penalties (3–4) in what was only the club's second defeat to an
English team in Munich, and their first at the Allianz Arena.

In the 2012–13 season, Bayern won the 2012 DFL-Supercup 2–1 against rivals
Borussia Dortmund. Bayern became the first team in history to win their first
eight matches in the Bundesliga after their 5–0 away win to Fortuna Düsseldorf.
On 6 April 2013, Bayern won the 2012–13 Bundesliga after a 1–0 win at Eintracht
Frankfurt with six games left, setting a new record for being the earliest ever
Bundesliga winners. Other Bundesliga records set by Bayern in the 2012–13 season
include most points in a season (91), highest league winning points margin (25),
most wins in a season (29) and fewest goals conceded in a season (18). Bayern
also equaled the record for fewest defeats in a season, losing once, to Bayer
Leverkusen. Bayern also reached the Champions League final for the third time in
four seasons, winning the club's fifth European Cup with a 2–1 defeat of
domestic rivals Borussia Dortmund at Wembley Stadium. On 1 June 2013, Bayern
beat VfB Stuttgart 3–2 in the 2013 DFB-Pokal final to become the first German
club in men's football to complete the treble; Bayern had missed out on trebles
in 1999 and 2010.

On 1 July 2013, Pep Guardiola took over as manager ahead of the 2013–14 season.
Bayern also completed the signing of Mario Götze from Borussia Dortmund for
€37 million, who became the most expensive German player in history (this was
later surpassed by Mesut Özil's transfer from Real Madrid to Arsenal for
€50 million). On 24 July 2013, it was reported that Bayern had become the first
German club with over 200,000 members. On 27 July 2013, Bayern Munich lost
against rivals Borussia Dortmund 2–4 in the 2013 DFL-Supercup at Signal Iduna
Park. On 30 August 2013, Bayern won the UEFA Super Cup against Chelsea. On 9
November 2013, Bayern set a new record for most successive Bundesliga matches
without defeat, breaking Hamburger SV's 30-year-old record of 36 matches. This
record was eventually extended to 53 matches, before Bayern lost 1–0 to FC
Augsburg in April 2014. On 27 November 2013, Bayern became the first team to win
ten consecutive Champions League matches with a 3–1 away victory over CSKA
Moscow. On 21 December 2013, Bayern beat Raja Casablanca 2–0 at the Stade de
Marrakech to win the 2013 FIFA Club World Cup.

After almost a year of investigations against Uli Hoeneß, Bayern's former
player, former long time general manager, and president at the time, he was
convicted of tax evasion on 13 March 2014. Hoeneß resigned as president the next
day, and Karl Hopfner was elected president on 2 May. Just days after Hoeneß
conviction, on 25 March, Bayern won their 24th Bundesliga title by beating
Hertha BSC 3–1 at the Olympiastadion in Berlin. With seven matches remaining in
the season, it was the earliest the championship had been won in Bundesliga
history, breaking the record Bayern had set in the previous season. At the end
of the season Bayern beat Borussia Dortmund 2–0 in the 2014 DFB-Pokal Final to
give the club the tenth league and cup double in its history. In 2014–15, Bayern
defended their league title, and, the following season, won an 11th double,
including a record fourth consecutive Bundesliga title. At the end of the
2015–16 season, Guardiola left Bayern to take over as manager of Manchester City
and was replaced by Carlo Ancelotti.

In the original club constitution, Bayern's colours were named as white and
blue, but the club played in white shirts with black shorts until 1905, when
Bayern joined MSC. MSC decreed that the footballers would have to play in red
shorts. Also the younger players were called red-shorts, which was meant as an
insult. For most of the club's early history, Bayern had primarily worn white
and maroon home kits. In 1968–69 season, Bayern changed to red and blue striped
shirts, with blue shorts and socks. Between 1969 and 1973, the team wore a home
strip of red and white striped shirts with either red or white shorts and red
socks. In the 1973–74 season, the team switched to an all white kit featuring
single vertical red and blue stripes on the shirt. From 1974 onwards, Bayern
have mostly worn an all red home kit, with white trim. Bayern revived the red
and blue striped colour scheme between 1995 and 1997. In 1997, blue was the
dominant colour for the first time when Adidas released an all navy blue home
kit with a red chest band. In 1999, Bayern returned to a predominantly red kit,
which featured blue sleeves, and in 2000 the club released a traditional all red
kit with white trim to be worn for Champions League matches. Bayern also wore a
Rotwein coloured home kits in Bundesliga matches between 2001 and 2003, and
during the 2006–07 Champions League campaign, in reference to their first choice
colours prior to the late 1960s.

The club's away kit has had a wide range of colours over the years, including
white, black, blue, and gold-green. Bayern also features a distinct
international kit. During the 2013–14 season, Bayern have used an all red home
kit with a Bavarian flag diamond watermark pattern, a Lederhosen inspired white
and black Oktoberfest away kit, and an all navy blue international kit.

In the 1980s and 1990s, Bayern used a special away kit when playing at 1. FC
Kaiserslautern, representing the Brazilian colours blue and yellow, a
superstition borne from the fact that the club found it hard to win there.

Bayern's crest has changed several times. Originally it consisted of the
stylised letters F, C, B, M, which were woven into one symbol. The original
crest was blue. The colours of Bavaria were included for the first time in 1954.

The modern version of the crest has changed from the 1954 version in several
steps. While the crest consisted of a single colour only for most of the time,
namely blue or red, the current (2008) crest is blue, red, and white. It has the
colours of Bavaria in its centre and FC Bayern München is written in white on a
red ring enclosing the Bavarian colours.

Bayern played its first training games at the Schyrenplatz in the centre of
Munich. The first official games were held on the Theresienwiese. In 1901,
Bayern moved to a field of its own, located in Schwabing at the Clemensstraße.
After joining the Münchner Sport-Club (MSC) in 1906, Bayern moved in May 1907 to
MSC's ground at the Leopoldstraße. As the crowds gathering for Bayern's home
games increased at the beginning of the 1920s, Bayern had to switch to various
other premises in Munich.

From 1925, Bayern shared the Grünwalder Stadion with 1860 Munich. Until World
War II, the stadium was owned by 1860 Munich, and is still colloquially known as
Sechz'ger ("Sixties") Stadium. It was destroyed during the war, and efforts to
rebuild it resulted in a patchwork. Bayern's record crowd at the Grünwalder
Stadion is reported as more than 50,000 in the home game against 1. FC Nürnberg
in the 1961–62 season. In the Bundesliga era the stadium had a maximum capacity
of 44,000 which was reached on several occasions, but the capacity has since
been reduced to 21,272. As was the case at most of this period's stadiums, the
vast majority of the stadium was given over to terracing. Today the second teams
of both clubs play in the stadium.

For the 1972 Summer Olympics the city of Munich built the Olympiastadion. The
stadium, renowned for its architecture, was inaugurated in the last Bundesliga
match of the 1971–72 season. The match drew a capacity crowd of 79,000, a total
which was reached again on numerous occasions. The stadium was, in its early
days, considered to be one of the foremost stadia in the world and played host
to numerous major finals, such as that of 1974 FIFA World Cup. In the following
years the stadium underwent several modifications, such as an increase in
seating space from approximately 50% to ca. 66% [clarification needed].
Eventually the stadium had a capacity of 63,000 for national matches, and 59,000
for international occasions such as European Cup competitions. Many people,
however, began to feel that the stadium was too cold in winter, with half the
audience exposed to the weather due to lack of cover. A further complaint was
the distance between the spectators and the pitch, the stadium betraying its
track and field heritage. Modification of the stadium proved impossible as the
architect Günther Behnisch vetoed major modifications of the stadium.

After much discussion, the city of Munich, the state of Bavaria, Bayern Munich
and 1860 Munich jointly decided at the end of 2000 to build a new stadium. While
Bayern had wanted a purpose-built football stadium for several years, the
awarding of the 2006 FIFA World Cup to Germany stimulated the discussion as the
Olympiastadion no longer met the FIFA criteria to host a World Cup game. Located
on the northern outskirts of Munich, the Allianz Arena has been in use since the
beginning of the 2005–06 season. Its initial capacity of 66,000 fully covered
seats has since been increased for matches on national level to 69,901 by
transforming 3,000 seats to terracing in a 2:1 ratio. Since August 2012, 2,000
more seats were added in the last row of the top tier increasing the capacity to
71,000. In January 2015, a proposal to increase the capacity was approved by the
city council so now Allianz Arena has a capacity of 75,000 (70,000 in Champions
League).

The most prominent feature of the stadium is the translucent outer layer, which
can be illuminated in different colours for impressive effects. Usually, red
lighting is used for Bayern home games, blue for 1860 Munich games and white for
German national team home games.

In May 2012, Bayern opened a museum about its history, FC Bayern Erlebniswelt,
inside the Allianz Arena.

Bayern considers itself a national club. The club had 3,202 fanclubs with total
231,197 members in 2012, making it the club with the largest number of organised
supporters in Germany. Owing partly to the club having supporters all over the
country, all of Bayern's away games have been sold out in recent years. Their
following is mainly recruited from the aspiring middle class and regional
Bavaria.[citation needed] Despite a large proportion of their supporters having
to travel more than 200 km (ca. 120 miles) regularly, the club's home matches in
the Allianz Arena have almost always been sold out. According to a study by
Sport+Markt Bayern is the fifth-most popular football club in Europe with 20.7
million supporters, and the most popular football club in Germany with 10
million supporters.

Bayern Munich is also renowned for its well-organised ultra scene. The most
prominent groups are the Schickeria München, the Inferno Bavaria, the Red
Munichs '89, the Südkurve '73, the Munichmaniacs 1996, the Red Angels, and the
Red Sharks. The ultras scene of Bayern Munch has been recognized for certain
groups taking stance against right-wing extremism, racism and homophobia, and in
2014 the group Schickeria München received the Julius Hirsch Award by the DFB
for its commitment against antisemitism and discrimination.

Stern des Südens is the song which fans sing at FCB home games. In the 1990s
they also used to sing FC Bayern, Forever Number One.

The club also has quite a number of high-profile supporters, among them Pope
Benedict XVI, Boris Becker, retired German tennis player, Wladimir Klitschko,
Ukrainian boxer, Horst Seehofer and Edmund Stoiber, former Minister-President of
Bavaria, to name just a few.

Bayern Munich has a rivalry with Borussia Dortmund. Bayern and Dortmund have
competed against each other for many Bundesliga titles. Bayern and Dortmund have
played against each other in the DFB-Pokal final in 2008, 2012, and 2014. The
2–5 loss against Dortmund in the 2012 DFB-Pokal final was Bayern's worst ever
loss in a final. Bayern and Dortmund have also played against each other in the
DFL-Supercup in 1989, 2008, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2016. The height of the rivalry
was when Bayern defeated Dortmund, 2–1 in the final of the 2013 UEFA Champions
League.

Bayern is one of three professional football clubs in Munich. Bayern's main
local rival is 1860 Munich, who were the more successful club in the 1960s,
winning a cup and a championship. In the 1970s and 1980s, 1860 Munich moved
between the first and the third division, but lately have settled in the second
division. The Munich derby is still a much anticipated event, getting a lot of
extra attention from supporters of both clubs. 1860 Munich is considered more
working-class, and therefore suffers from a diminishing fan base in a city where
the manufacturing sector is declining.[citation needed] Bayern is considered the
establishment club, which is reflected by many board members being business
leaders[dubious – discuss] and including the former Bavarian minister president,
Edmund Stoiber. Despite the rivalry, Bayern has repeatedly supported 1860 in
times of financial disarray.

Since the 1920s, 1. FC Nürnberg has been Bayern's main and traditional rival in
Bavaria. Philipp Lahm said that playing Nürnberg is "always special" and is a
"heated atmosphere". Both clubs played in the same league in the mid-1920s, but
in the 1920s and 1930s, Nürnberg was far more successful, winning five
championships in the 1920s, making the club Germany's record champion. Bayern
took over the title more than sixty years later, when they won their tenth
championship in 1987, thereby surpassing the number of championships won by
Nürnberg. The duel between Bayern and Nürnberg is often referred to as the
Bavarian Derby.

Bayern also enjoys a strong rivalry with the 1. FC Kaiserslautern, originating
in parts from a game in 1973, when Bayern lost 7–4 after leading 4–1, but also
from the two clubs competing for German championship honours at various times in
the Bundesliga as well as the city of Kaiserslautern together with the
surrounding Palatinate having been part of Bavaria until a plebiscite after the
end of the Second World War.

Since the 1970s, Bayern's main rivals have been the clubs who put up the
strongest fight against its national dominance. In the 1970s this was Borussia
Mönchengladbach, in the 1980s the category expanded to include Hamburger SV. In
the 1990s, Borussia Dortmund, Werder Bremen and Bayer Leverkusen emerged as the
most ardent opponents. Recently Borussia Dortmund, Schalke, and Werder Bremen
have been the main challengers in the Bundesliga.

Amongst Bayern's chief European rivals are Real Madrid, A.C. Milan, and
Manchester United due to many classic wins, draws and losses. Real Madrid versus
Bayern is the match that has historically been played most often in the
Champions League with 14 matches and the European Cup with 19 matches. Real's
biggest loss at home in the Champions League came at the hands of Bayern on 29
February 2000 (2–4). Due to Bayern being traditionally hard to beat for Madrid,
Madrid supporters often refer to Bayern as the "Bestia negra" ("Black Beast").
Despite the number of duels, Bayern and Real have never met in the final of a
Champions League or European Cup.

Bayern is led mostly by former club players. Since 2 May 2014, Karl Hopfner
serves as the club's president, following Uli Hoeneß who had been in office from
2009 to 2014; Hoeneß had resigned after being convicted of tax fraud. Karl-Heinz
Rummenigge is the chairman of the executive board of the AG. The supervisory
board of nine consists mostly of managers of big German corporations. Besides
the club's president and the board's chairman Karl Hopfner, they are Herbert
Hainer (Adidas), Rupert Stadler (Audi), Werner Zedelius (Allianz), Timotheus
Höttges (Deutsche Telekom), Rudolf Schels, Edmund Stoiber, Theodor Weimer
(UniCredit Bank), and Martin Winterkorn (Volkswagen).

Professional football at Bayern is run by the spin-off organization FC Bayern
München AG. AG is short for Aktiengesellschaft, and Bayern is run like a joint
stock company, a company whose stock are not listed on the public stock
exchange, but is privately owned. 75% of FC Bayern München AG is owned by the
club, the FC Bayern München e. V. (e. V. is short for Eingetragener Verein,
which translates into "Registered Club"). Three Germany-based corporations, the
sports goods manufacturer Adidas, the automobile company Audi and the financial
services group Allianz each hold 8.33% of the shares, 25% in total. Adidas
acquired its shares in 2002 for €77 million. The money was designated to help
finance the Allianz Arena. In 2009 Audi paid €90 million for their share. The
capital was reportedly going to be used to repay the loan for the Allianz Arena
quicker than originally planned. And in early 2014, Allianz became the fourth
stakeholder of the company acquiring theirs share for €110 million. Bayern's
other sports departments are run by the club.

Bayern's main advertising partner and current holder of the jersey rights is
Deutsche Telekom. The main supplier of the club is Adidas. The premium partners
include Audi, HypoVereinsbank, Imtech, Lufthansa, MAN, Paulaner Brewery,
Samsung, DHL and Yingli Solar. Classic sponsors include Coca-Cola, Siemens,
Hublot, Henkel, Flyeralarm, Nestle Schoeller, Adelholzener, Fitness First,
Schaeffler Group, s.Oliver, Viagogo, Trentino, Thomas Sabo and Starwood Hotels
and Resorts. Food sponsors include Albi, BiFi, Ehrmann and MF. In previous years
the jersey rights were held by Adidas (1974–78), Magirus Deutz and Iveco (trucks
/ 1978–84), Commodore (computers / 1984–89) and Opel (cars / 1989–2002).

Bayern is an exception in professional, international football, having generated
profits in nine of the last ten seasons. Other clubs often report losses,
realizing transfers via loans, whereas Bayern always uses current assets. Also
Bayern differs from other European top clubs in their income composition. While
other clubs derive more than 35% of their revenues from broadcasting right,
Bayern earn only 22% of their revenues that way. This is often accounted for by
Bayern not marketing their broadcasting right themselves.[citation needed]
Instead the Deutsche Fußball Liga negotiates broadcasting rights for the whole
Bundesliga.

In 2011–12, Bayern reported revenues of €373 million, marking the eighth
consecutive time that Bayern has topped their previous record earnings.
According to the 2013 edition of Deloitte's annual Football Money League, Bayern
was the fourth richest club in the world in 2012, generating revenues of €368.4
million.

While other European clubs have mainly marketed to international audiences,
Bayern has focused on Germany. Forbes ranks Bayern as the world's fifth-most
valuable football club in their annual list, estimating the club's value at
US$1.235 billion. As a result of Bayern's finals appearance in the 2012 UEFA
Champions League, the club's brand value has reached US$786 million, up 59% from
the previous year. Among European teams, this is ahead of Real Madrid's
US$600 million and behind first-placed Manchester United, whose brand is valued
at US$853 million. In 2013, Bayern overtook Manchester United to take first
place in brand valuation.

Bayern has been involved with charitable ventures for a long time, helping other
football clubs in financial disarray as well as ordinary people in misery. In
the wake of the 2004 Tsunami the "FC Bayern – Hilfe e.V." was founded, a
foundation that aims to concentrate the social engagements of the club. At its
inception this venture was funded with €600,000, raised by officials and players
of the club. The money was amongst other things used to build a school in
Marathenkerny, Sri Lanka and to rebuild the area of Trincomalee, Sri Lanka. In
April 2007 it was decided that the focus of the foundation would shift towards
supporting people in need locally.

The club has also time and again shown to have a soft spot for clubs in
financial disarray. Repeatedly the club has supported its local rival 1860
Munich with gratuitous friendlies, transfers at favourable rates, and direct
money transfers. Also when St. Pauli threatened to lose its license for
professional football due to financial problems, Bayern met the club for a
friendly game free of any charge, giving all revenues to St. Pauli. More
recently when Mark van Bommel's home club Fortuna Sittard was in financial
distress Bayern came to a charity game at the Dutch club. Another well known
example was the transfer of Alexander Zickler in 1993 from Dynamo Dresden. When
Bayern picked up Zickler for 2.3 Million DM many considered the sum to be a
subvention for the financially threatened Dresdeners. In 2003, Bayern provided a
2 Million Euro loan without collateral to the nearly bankrupt Borussia Dortmund
which has since been repaid. On 14 July 2013, Bayern played a charity game
against financially threatened third division Hansa Rostock. The game raised
about €1 million, securing Hansa's licence.

In the summer of 2013 Bayern was the first club to give financial support to the
Magnus Hirschfeld National Foundation. The foundation researches the living
environment LGBT people, and developed an education concept to facilitate
unbiased dealing with LGBT themes in football.

FC Bayern Munich training facilities, for both the professional and the Junior
Team, are located at the Bayern Munich Headquarters. There are four grass
pitches, one of which has undersoil heating, one artificial grass field and a
multi-functional sports hall. After the closure of Munich American High School,
FC Bayern purchased the DoDDS adjacent sporting fields that previously held
MAHS's football pitch and baseball field. A new grass pitch was placed over the
existing football pitch while an artificial turf field was placed over the
baseball diamond.[citation needed]

The players' quarters opened in 1990 and were reconstructed after the 2007–08
season on suggestions by the new coach, Jürgen Klinsmann, who took inspiration
from various major sports clubs. The quarters are now called the performance
centre and feature a weights and fitness area, a massage unit, dressing rooms,
the coaches' office, and a conference room with screening facilities for video
analysis. A café, a library, an e-Learning room, and a family room are also
included.

Located at the headquarters is also the Youth academy, which houses up to 13
young talents from outside the city. While being part of Bayern's Junior Team
they can work there on their development as footballers. Former residents of the
Youth House include Owen Hargreaves, Michael Rensing, and Bastian
Schweinsteiger.

In 2006 Bayern purchased land near the Allianz Arena with the purpose of
building a new youth academy. In 2015 the project, estimated to cost €70
million, was started, after overcoming internal resistance. The main reasons for
the project were that the existing facilities were too small and that the club,
while very successful at senior level, lacked competitiveness with other German
and European clubs at youth level. The new facility is scheduled to open in the
2017–18 season.

Bayern is historically the most successful team in German football, as they have
won the most championships and the most cups. They are also Germany's most
successful team in international competitions, having won eleven trophies.
Bayern is one of only four clubs to have won all three major European
competitions and also the last club to have won the European Cup three times in
a row, entitling them to wear a multiple-winner badge during Champions League
matches.

Bayern Munich is the first team in Europe to have completed all available
Trebles (continental treble, domestic treble and European treble).

Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules.
Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.

Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules.
Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.

At his farewell game, Oliver Kahn was declared honorary captain of Bayern
Munich. The players below are part of the FC Bayern Munich Hall of Fame.

Bayern had 19 coaches since its promotion to the Bundesliga in 1965. Udo Lattek,
Giovanni Trapattoni, Ottmar Hitzfeld and Jupp Heynckes served two terms as head
coach. Franz Beckenbauer served one term as head coach and one as caretaker.
Lattek was the club's most successful coach, having won six Bundeslige titles,
two DFB Cups and the European Cup; following closely is Ottmar Hitzfeld, who won
five Bundeslige titles, two DFB cups and the Champions League. The club's least
successful coach was Søren Lerby, who won less than a third of his matches in
charge and presided over the club's near-relegation in the 1991–92 campaign.

The present manager, since July 2016, is Carlo Ancelotti, Real Madrid's former
coach. On 20 December 2015, the club announced that Guardiola would not extend
his contract beyond the end of the 2015–16 season. Carlo Ancelotti would be
presented as his successor.

Rank = Rank in the Bundesliga; P = Played; W = Win; D = Draw; L = Loss; F =
Goals for; A = Goals against; GD = Goal difference; Pts = Points; Cup =
DFB-Pokal; EL = UEFA Europa League; CL = UEFA Champions League. in = Still in
competition; — = Not attended; 1R = 1st round; 2R = 2nd round; 3R = 3rd round;
R16 = Round of sixteen; QF = Quarterfinals; SF = Semifinals.

The reserve team serves mainly as the final stepping stone for promising young
players before being promoted to the main team. The second team coached by Heiko
Vogel, assisted by Danny Schwarz and Rainer Ulrich. Since the inception of the
Regionalliga in 1994, the team played in the Regionalliga Süd, after playing in
the Oberliga since 1978. In the 2007–08 season they qualified for the newly
founded 3. Liga, where they lasted until 2011, when they were relegated to the
Regionalliga. This ended 33 consecutive years of playing in the highest league
that the German Football Association permits the second team of a professional
football team to play.

The youth academy has produced some of Europe's top football players, including
Owen Hargreaves, Thomas Hitzlsperger, Philipp Lahm, Thomas Müller and Bastian
Schweinsteiger. The division was founded in 1902 and is run by Werner Kern and
Björn Andersson. It consists of ten teams, with the youngest being under 9.

The women's football department consists of five teams, including a professional
team, a reserve team, and two youth teams. The women's first team, which is led
by head coach Thomas Wörle, features several members of the German national
youth team. In the 2008–09 season the team finished second in the women's
Bundesliga. The division was founded in 1970 and consists of four teams with 90
players. Their greatest successes were winning the championships in 1976, 2015
and 2016. In the 2011–12 season on 12 May 2012, FC Bayern Munich dethroned the
German Cup title holders 1. FFC Frankfurt with a 2–0 in the 2011–12 final in
Cologne and celebrated the biggest success of the club's history since winning
the championship in 1976. In 2015 they won the Bundesliga for the first time,
without any defeat. They won the 2015–16 Bundesliga, for the second time in a
row.

The senior football department was founded in 2002, making it the youngest
division of the club, and consists of five teams. The division is intended to
enable senior athletes to participate in the various senior citizen competitions
in Munich.

The FC Bayern AllStars were founded in summer 2006, and consists of former
Bayern players, including Klaus Augenthaler, Raimond Aumann, Andreas Brehme,
Paul Breitner, Hans Pflügler, Stefan Reuter, Paulo Sérgio, and Olaf Thon. The
team is coached by Wolfgang Dremmler, and plays matches with other senior teams
around the world. For organisational reasons, the team can only play a limited
number of games annually.

The basketball department was founded in 1946, and currently contains 26 teams,
including four men's teams, three women's teams, sixteen youth teams, and three
senior teams. The men's team a three time German champions, having won in 1954,
1955, and 2014. The team also won the German Basketball Cup in 1968.

The bowling department emerged from SKC Real-Isaria in 1983 and currently
consists of five teams. Directly next to the well-known club building of the
football department, the team plays at the bowling alley of the Münchner
Kegler-Verein. The first team plays in the second highest division of the
Münchner Spielklasse Bezirksliga.

The department was created in 1908, and consists of nine teams, including seven
men's teams and two women's teams. The men's team, which currently plays in the
Chess Bundesliga following promotion in 2013 from the 2. Bundesliga Ost, was
nine time German Champion from 1983 to 1995. The team also won the European
Chess Club Cup in 1992. The women play in the 2. Bundesliga, with their biggest
success being the rise to the league in 2002.

The handball department was founded in 1945, and consists of thirteen teams,
including three men's teams, two women's teams, five boys teams, two girls
teams, and a mixed youth team. The first men's team plays in the Bezirksoberliga
Oberbayern, while the women's first teams plays in the Bezirksliga Oberbayern.

The refereeing department was established in 1919 and is currently the largest
football refereeing division in Europe, with 110 referees, with 2 of them women.
The referees mainly officiate amateur games in the local Munich leagues.

The table tennis department was founded in 1946 and currently has 220 members.
The club currently has fourteen teams, including eight men's teams, a women's
team, three youth teams, and two children teams. The women's first team is
currently playing in the Landesliga Süd/Ost, while the men's first team plays in
the 3. Bundesliga Süd. The focus of the department is on youth support.

From 1966 to 1969 there existed an ice hockey team, which completed two seasons
in the Eishockey-Bundesliga.

Coordinates: 48°6′6.64″N 11°34′22.00″E﻿ / ﻿48.1018444°N 11.5727778°E﻿ /
48.1018444; 11.5727778



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Dark_Tower_(series)

The Dark Tower is a series of eight books written by American author Stephen
King that incorporates themes from multiple genres, including dark fantasy,
science fantasy, horror, and Western. It describes a "gunslinger" and his quest
toward a tower, the nature of which is both physical and metaphorical. The
series, and its use of the Dark Tower, expands upon Stephen King's multiverse
and in doing so, links together many of his other novels. King has described the
series as his magnum opus. In addition to the eight novels of the series proper
that comprise 4,250 pages, many of King's other books relate to the story,
introducing concepts and characters that come into play as the series
progresses.

The series was chiefly inspired by the poem "Childe Roland to the Dark Tower
Came" by Robert Browning, whose full text was included in the final volume's
appendix. In the preface to the revised 2003 edition of The Gunslinger, King
also identifies The Lord of the Rings, Arthurian Legend, and The Good, the Bad
and the Ugly as inspirations. He identifies Clint Eastwood's "Man with No Name"
character as one of the major inspirations for the protagonist, Roland Deschain.
King's style of location names in the series, such as Mid-World, and his
development of a unique language abstract to our own (High Speech), are also
influenced by J. R. R. Tolkien's work.

A film adaptation is currently scheduled for release in July 2017 with Idris
Elba as the lead character.

Stephen King saw the Dark Tower series as a first draft. He planned to rewrite
it to eliminate continuity errors and possibly remove himself from the later
books, but after revising The Gunslinger, he decided a rewrite for the entire
series was no longer necessary.

In the story, Roland Deschain is the last living member of a knightly order
known as gunslingers and the last of the line of "Arthur Eld", his world's
analogue of King Arthur. Politically organized along the lines of a feudal
society, it shares technological and social characteristics with the American
Old West but is also magical. Many of the magical aspects have vanished from
Mid-World, but traces remain as do relics from a technologically advanced
society. Roland's quest is to find the Dark Tower, a fabled building said to be
the nexus of all universes. Roland's world is said to have "moved on", and it
appears to be coming apart at the seams. Mighty nations have been torn apart by
war, entire cities and regions vanish without a trace and time does not flow in
an orderly fashion. Sometimes, even the sun rises in the north and sets in the
east. As the series opens, Roland's motives, goals and age are unclear, though
later installments shed light on these mysteries.

Along his journey to the Dark Tower, Roland meets a great number of both friends
and enemies. For most of the way he is accompanied by a group of people who
together with him form the Ka-tet of the Nineteen and Ninety-nine, consisting of
Jake Chambers, Eddie Dean, Susannah Dean, and Oy. Among his many enemies on the
way are The Man In Black, Mordred and The Crimson King.

King created a language for his characters, known as the High Speech. Examples
of this language include the phrases Thankee, Sai ("Thank you, Sir/Ma'am.") and
Dan-Tete ("Little Savior"). In addition, King uses the term Ka, which is the
approximate equivalent of destiny, or fate, in the fictional language High
Speech (and similarly, Ka-tet, a group of people bound together by
fate/destiny). This term originated in Egyptian mythology and storytelling, and
has figured in several other novels and screenplays since 1976. The term also
appears in King's short story, Low Men in Yellow Coats, in which Ted describes
its meaning to Bobby.

While the series was declared finished with the publication of the seventh
volume in 2004, King described in an interview in March 2009 an idea for a new
short story he'd recently had: "And then I thought, 'Well, why don't I find
three more like this and do a book that would be almost like modern fairy
tales?' Then this thing started to add on bits and pieces so I guess it will be
a novel." According to King, the idea was a new Dark Tower novel.

King said, regarding The Dark Tower, "It's not really done yet. Those seven
books are really sections of one long über-novel." Stephen King confirmed this
during his TimesTalk event at The Times Center in New York City on November 10,
2009, and the next day King's official site posted that King will begin working
on this novel in about eight months, with a tentative title being The Wind
Through the Keyhole. King noted that this novel should be set between the fourth
and the fifth books of the series. The book, titled The Dark Tower: The Wind
Through the Keyhole, was announced on Stephen King's official site on March 10,
2011, and was published on April 24, 2012.

In July 2016, director Nikolaj Arcel confirmed that the Dark Tower film would be
a sequel to the novels as well as a direct adaptation, with Roland in the next
cycle of his journey to the Tower.

Each book in the series was originally published in hardcover format with a
number of full-color illustrations spread throughout. Each book contained works
by a single illustrator only. Subsequent printings of each book in trade
paperback format usually preserve the illustrations in full, except for books I
and IV. Pocket-sized paperback reprints contain only black-and-white chapter or
section header illustrations.

Bill Sheehan of The Washington Post called the series "a humane, visionary epic
and a true magnum opus" that stands as an "imposing example of pure
storytelling," "filled with brilliantly rendered set pieces... cataclysmic
encounters and moments of desolating tragedy." Erica Noonan of the Boston Globe
said, "There's a fascinating world to be discovered in the series" but noted
that its epic nature keeps it from being user-friendly. Allen Johnston of The
New York Times was disappointed with how the series progressed; while he
marveled at the "sheer absurdity of [the books'] existence" and complimented
King's writing style, he said preparation would have improved the series,
stating "King doesn't have the writerly finesse for these sorts of games, and
the voices let him down." Michael Berry of the San Francisco Chronicle, however,
called the series' early installments "highfalutin hodgepodge" but the ending "a
valediction" that "more than delivers on what has been promised."

The series has prompted related non-fiction books by authors besides King. Robin
Furth has published the two-volume Stephen King's The Dark Tower: A Concordance,
an encyclopedia-style companion to the series that she originally wrote for
King's personal use. Bev Vincent has published The Road to The Dark Tower:
Exploring Stephen King's Magnum Opus, a book containing back story, summary and
analysis. Stephen King has endorsed both books.

A prequel to the Dark Tower series, set around the time of the flashbacks in The
Gunslinger and Wizard and Glass, has been released by Marvel Comics. With the
project overseen by King, The Dark Tower: The Gunslinger Born is plotted by
Robin Furth, scripted by Peter David, and illustrated by Jae Lee and Richard
Isanove. The first issue of this first arc was released on February 7, 2007. A
hardcover volume containing all seven issues was released on November 7, 2007.

The second arc in the Dark Tower comic series was released by Marvel Comics.
Called The Long Road Home, the first issue was published on March 5, 2008. A
hardcover volume containing all five issues was released on October 15, 2008.

The third arc in the Dark Tower comic series was released by Marvel Comics, and
it is called The Dark Tower: Treachery. The first issue of the six issue arc was
published on September 10, 2008. A hardcover volume containing all 6 issues was
released on April 21, 2009.

Following the completion of the third arc a one-shot issue titled The Dark
Tower: Sorcerer was released April 8, 2009. The story focuses on the history of
the villainous wizard Marten Broadcloak.

The fourth arc in the Dark Tower comic series was released by Marvel Comics, and
it is called The Dark Tower: The Fall of Gilead. The first issue of the six
issue arc was published on May 13, 2009. A hardcover volume containing all 6
issues, as well as the Sorcerer One-Shot was released on February 2, 2010.

The fifth arc in the Dark Tower comic series was released by Marvel Comics, and
it is called The Dark Tower: Battle of Jericho Hill. The first issue of the five
issue arc was published on December 3, 2009. A hardcover volume containing all 5
issues was released on August 17, 2010.

Marvel Comics has also published three supplemental books to date that expand
upon characters and locations first introduced in the novels. The Dark Tower:
Gunslingers' Guidebook was released in 2007, The Dark Tower: End-World Almanac
was released in 2008, and The Dark Tower: Guide to Gilead was released in 2009.
All three books were written by Anthony Flamini, with Furth serving as creative
consultant. End-World Almanac and Guide to Gilead feature illustrations by David
Yardin.

An adaption of King's novel The Dark Tower: The Gunslinger, titled The Dark
Tower: The Gunslinger - The Journey Begins, was made into a comic series and
released by Marvel Comics. The first issue of the five-issue arc was published
on May 19, 2010. The collected hardback edition was released on January 26,
2011.

An adaption of King's novella The Little Sisters of Eluria, titled The Dark
Tower: The Gunslinger - The Little Sisters of Eluria, was made into a comic
series and released by Marvel Comics. The first issue of the five-issue arc was
published on December 8, 2010. The collected hardback edition was released on
June 8, 2011.

A second adaption of King's novel The Dark Tower: The Gunslinger, titled The
Dark Tower: The Gunslinger - The Battle of Tull, was made into a comic series
and released by Marvel Comics. The first issue of the five-issue arc was
published on June 1, 2011. The collected hardback edition was released on
January 25, 2012.

A third adaption of King's novel The Dark Tower: The Gunslinger, titled The Dark
Tower: The Gunslinger - The Way Station, was made into a comic series and
released by Marvel Comics. The first issue of the five-issue arc was published
on December 14, 2011. The collected hardback edition was released on June 27,
2012.

December 7, 2009 saw the release of a spin-off online game titled Discordia,
available to play free of charge on the official Stephen King website. The game
is a continuation of the original Dark Tower story, following the war between
the Tet Corporation and Sombra/NCP in New York, and it has been supervised by
both Stephen King and Robin Furth. From the website: "Exploring the
behind-the-scenes conflict between the two companies, Discordia introduces
long-time Dark Tower fans to new characters and numerous mechanical/magical
items developed by Mid-World's Old Ones. Over the course of our adventure we
will visit many locations, both those familiar to Dark Tower fans and others
which we only glimpsed in the Dark Tower novels. While we may not see Roland and
his ka-tet in this adventure, the development team has remembered the faces of
its fathers. We have done our best to honor the original Dark Tower series while
simultaneously mapping new and exciting Dark Tower territory."

Initially, in 2007, J. J. Abrams was connected to a film adaptation but later
revealed he had removed himself from involvement in the project. On September 8,
2010, an official announcement was made that the series would be brought to both
the big and the small screens via a trilogy of feature films and two seasons of
a television series to bridge gaps between the films. According to a press
release from Universal Pictures from October 29, 2010, the first Dark Tower film
would open on May 17, 2013. On July 19, 2011, Universal pulled its support from
the production of the Dark Tower films and television series. According to
reports, the studio was unable to come to terms with producer Ron Howard.
Despite this, Stephen King remains confident Howard would see the project
through with another studio, and Howard confirmed the adaptation was still on
track, noting that HBO would now carry the television series portions of the
project.

On March 13, 2012, it was reported that Warner Bros. Pictures was now interested
in making at least the first film and that Russell Crowe, tipped to play Roland
Deschain, was no longer on board. Reports indicated that filming may have
commenced as early as the first quarter of 2013. However, Warner eventually
passed on the film. Later, on April 10, 2015, it was reported that Sony Pictures
and Media Rights Capital would be going ahead with the first film in the series
alongside a television series, using a reworked script by Akiva Goldsman, who
worked on the initial 2010 proposal, and Jeff Pinkner. On June 2, 2015, Nikolaj
Arcel was hired by the studio to direct the film. On August 5, 2015, Sony set
the film for a release on January 13, 2017. On March 1, 2016, it was announced
that Idris Elba and Matthew McConaughey had both joined the film, cast
respectively as Roland Deschain and Randall Flagg.

The series has become a linchpin that ties together much of King's body of work.
The worlds of The Dark Tower are in part composed of locations, characters,
events and other various elements from many of King's novels and short stories.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sweden

Sweden (i/ˈswiːdən/ SWEE-dən; Swedish: Sverige [ˈsværjɛ]  listen (help·info)),
officially the Kingdom of Sweden (Swedish:  Konungariket Sverige (help·info)),
is a Scandinavian country in Northern Europe. It borders Norway to the west and
Finland to the east, and is connected to Denmark in the southwest by a
bridge-tunnel across the Öresund. At 450,295 square kilometres (173,860 sq mi),
Sweden is the third-largest country in the European Union by area, with a total
population of 10.0 million. Sweden consequently has a low population density of
22 inhabitants per square kilometre (57/sq mi), with the highest concentration
in the southern half of the country. Approximately 85% of the population lives
in urban areas.

Germanic peoples have inhabited Sweden since prehistoric times, emerging into
history as the Geats/Götar and Swedes/Svear and constituting the sea peoples
known as the Norsemen. Southern Sweden is predominantly agricultural, while the
north is heavily forested. Sweden is part of the geographical area of
Fennoscandia. The climate is in general very mild for its northerly latitude due
to significant maritime influence, that in spite of this still retains warm
continental summers. Today, Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and
parliamentary democracy, with a monarch as head of state. The capital city is
Stockholm, which is also the most populous city in the country. Legislative
power is vested in the 349-member unicameral Riksdag. Executive power is
exercised by the government chaired by the prime minister. Sweden is a unitary
state, currently divided into 21 counties and 290 municipalities.

Sweden emerged as an independent and unified country during the Middle Ages. In
the 17th century, it expanded its territories to form the Swedish Empire, which
became one of the great powers of Europe until the early 18th century. Swedish
territories outside the Scandinavian Peninsula were gradually lost during the
18th and 19th centuries, ending with the annexation of present-day Finland by
Russia in 1809. The last war in which Sweden was directly involved was in 1814,
when Norway was militarily forced into personal union. Since then, Sweden has
been at peace, maintaining an official policy of neutrality in foreign affairs.
The union with Norway was peacefully dissolved in 1905, leading to Sweden's
current borders. Though Sweden was formally neutral through both world wars,
Sweden engaged in humanitarian efforts, such as taking in refugees from
German-occupied Europe.

After the end of the Cold War, Sweden joined the European Union on 1 January
1995, but declined NATO membership, as well as Eurozone membership following a
referendum. It is also a member of the United Nations, the Nordic Council,
Council of Europe, the World Trade Organization and the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Sweden maintains a Nordic social
welfare system that provides universal health care and tertiary education for
its citizens. It has the world's eighth-highest per capita income and ranks
highly in numerous metrics of national performance, including quality of life,
health, education, protection of civil liberties, economic competitiveness,
equality, prosperity and human development.

The modern name Sweden is derived through back-formation from Old English
Swēoþēod, which meant "people of the Swedes" (Old Norse Svíþjóð, Latin Suetidi).
This word is derived from Sweon/Sweonas (Old Norse Sviar, Latin Suiones). The
Swedish name Sverige (a compound of the words Svea and Rike, with lenition of
the consonant [k], first recorded in the cognate Swēorice in Beowulf) literally
means "Realm of the Swedes", excluding the Geats in Götaland.

Variations of the name Sweden are used in most languages, with the exception of
Danish and Norwegian using Sverige, Faroese Svøríki, Icelandic Svíþjóð, and the
more notable exception of some Finnic languages where Ruotsi (Finnish) and
Rootsi (Estonian) are used, names commonly considered etymologically related to
the English name for Russia, referring to the people, Rus', originally from the
coastal areas of Roslagen, Uppland.

The etymology of Swedes, and thus Sweden, is generally not agreed upon but may
derive from Proto-Germanic Swihoniz meaning "one's own", referring to one's own
Germanic tribe.

Sweden's prehistory begins in the Allerød oscillation,[according to whom?] a
warm period around 12,000 BC, with Late Palaeolithic reindeer-hunting camps of
the Bromme culture at the edge of the ice in what is now the country's
southernmost province, Scania. This period was characterised by small bands of
hunter-gatherer-fishers using flint technology.

Sweden is first described in a written source in Germania by Tacitus in 98 AD.
In Germania 44 and 45 he mentions the Swedes (Suiones) as a powerful tribe
(distinguished not merely for their arms and men, but for their powerful fleets)
with ships that had a prow at each end (longships). Which kings (kuningaz) ruled
these Suiones is unknown, but Norse mythology presents a long line of legendary
and semi-legendary kings going back to the last centuries BC. As for literacy in
Sweden itself, the runic script was in use among the south Scandinavian elite by
at least the 2nd century AD, but all that has come down to the present from the
Roman Period is curt inscriptions on artefacts, mainly of male names,
demonstrating that the people of south Scandinavia spoke Proto-Norse at the
time, a language ancestral to Swedish and other North Germanic
languages.[non-primary source needed]

In the 6th century Jordanes names two tribes living in Scandza, both of which
are now considered to be synonymous with the Swedes: the Suetidi and Suehans.
Suetidi is considered to be the Latin form of Svíþjóð, the Old Norse name for
the Swedes. Jordanes describes the Suetidi and Dani as being of the same stock
and the tallest of people. He later mentions other Scandinavian tribes as being
of a same stature.[non-primary source needed] The Suehans were known to the
Roman world as suppliers of black fox skins and, according to Jordanes, had very
fine horses, similar to those of the Thyringi of Germania (alia vero gens ibi
moratur Suehans, quae velud Thyringi equis utuntur eximiis). The Icelandic
historian Snorri Sturluson also wrote that the Swedish king Adils (Eadgils) had
the finest horses of his day.

The Swedish Viking Age lasted roughly from the 8th century to the 11th century.
It is believed that Swedish Vikings and Gutar mainly travelled east and south,
going to Finland, the Baltic countries, Russia, Belarus, Ukraine, the Black Sea
and even as far as Baghdad. Their routes passed through the Dnieper south to
Constantinople, on which they carried out numerous raids. The Byzantine Emperor
Theophilos noticed their great skills in war, and invited them to serve as his
personal bodyguard, known as the Varangian Guard. The Swedish Vikings, called
Rus are believed to be the founding fathers of Kievan Rus'. The Arab traveller
Ibn Fadlan described these Vikings as follows:

The actions of these Swedish Vikings are commemorated on many runestones in
Sweden, such as the Greece runestones and the Varangian runestones. There was
also considerable participation in expeditions westwards, which are commemorated
on stones such as the England runestones. The last major Swedish Viking
expedition appears to have been the ill-fated expedition of Ingvar the
Far-Travelled to Serkland, the region south-east of the Caspian Sea. Its members
are commemorated on the Ingvar runestones, none of which mentions any survivor.
What happened to the crew is unknown, but it is believed that they died of
sickness.

It is not known when and how the kingdom of Sweden was born, but the list of
Swedish monarchs is drawn from the first kings known to have ruled both Svealand
(Sweden) and Götaland (Gothia) as one province, beginning with Eric the
Victorious. Sweden and Gothia were two separate nations long before that into
antiquity. It is not known how long they existed: the epic poem Beowulf
describes semi-legendary Swedish-Geatish wars in the 6th century. "Götaland" in
this sense mainly includes the provinces of Östergötland (East Gothia) and
Västergötland (West Gothia). The island of Gotland was disputed by other than
Swedes, at this time (Danish, Hanseatic, and Gotland-domestic). Småland was at
that time of little interest to anyone due to the deep pine forests, and only
the city of Kalmar with its castle was of importance. The south-west parts of
the Scandinavian peninsula consisted of three Danish provinces (Scania, Blekinge
and Halland). North of Halland Denmark had a direct border to Norway and its
province Bohuslän. But there were Swedish settlements in south-west Finland, and
along the southern coastline of Norrland.

During the early stages of the Scandinavian Viking Age, Ystad in Danish province
Scania and Paviken on Gotland, were flourishing centres of trade, but they were
not parts of the early Swedish Kingdom. Remains of what is believed to have been
a large market dating from 600–700 AD have been found in Ystad. In Paviken, an
important centre of trade in the Baltic region during the 9th and 10th century,
remains have been found of a large Viking Age harbour with shipbuilding yards
and handicraft industries. Between 800 and 1000, trade brought an abundance of
silver to Gotland, and according to some scholars, the Gotlanders of this era
hoarded more silver than the rest of the population of Scandinavia combined.

St. Ansgar is usually credited with introducing Christianity in 829, but the new
religion did not begin to fully replace paganism until the 12th century. During
the 11th century, Christianity became the most prevalent religion, and from 1050
Sweden is counted as a Christian nation. The period between 1100 and 1400 was
characterised by internal power struggles and competition among the Nordic
kingdoms. In the years 1150–1293 according to the legend of Eric IX and the Eric
Chronicles and Swedish kings made first, second and third crusade to pagan
Finland against Finns, Tavastians and Karelians and started conflicts with the
Rus with who no longer had any connection with Sweden. The Swedish colonisation
of the coastal areas of Finland started at the same time in 12th and 13th
century. In 14th century Swedish colonisation of coastal areas of Finland began
to be more organised and in the end of the century several of the coastal areas
of Finland were inhabitet mostly by Swedes.

Except for the provinces of Scania, Blekinge and Halland, in the south-west of
the Scandinavian peninsula which were parts of the Kingdom of Denmark during
this time, feudalism never developed in Sweden as it did in the rest of Europe.
The peasantry therefore remained largely a class of free farmers throughout most
of Swedish history. Slavery (also called thralldom) was not common in Sweden,
and what slavery there was tended to be driven out of existence by the spread of
Christianity, the difficulty in obtaining slaves from the lands east of the
Baltic Sea, and by the development of cities before the 16th century. Indeed,
both slavery and serfdom were abolished altogether by a decree of King Magnus IV
in 1335. Former slaves tended to be absorbed into the peasantry, and some became
labourers in the towns. Still, Sweden remained a poor and economically backward
country in which barter was the means of exchange. For instance, the farmers of
the province of Dalsland would transport their butter to the mining districts of
Sweden and exchange it there for iron, which they would then take to the coast
and trade for fish, which they consumed, while the iron would be shipped abroad.

In the middle of the 14th century, Sweden was struck by the Black Death. The
population of Sweden and most of Europe was seriously decimated. And the
population (at same territory) as existed by 1348 did not reach the same numbers
again until the beginning of the 19th century. One third of the population died
during 1349–1351. During this period, the Swedish cities began to acquire
greater rights and were strongly influenced by German merchants of the Hanseatic
League, active especially at Visby. In 1319, Sweden and Norway were united under
King Magnus Eriksson, and in 1397 Queen Margaret I of Denmark effected the
personal union of Sweden, Norway, and Denmark through the Kalmar Union. However,
Margaret's successors, whose rule was also centred in Denmark, were unable to
control the Swedish nobility.

A large number of children inherited the Swedish crown over the course of the
kingdom's existence; consequently real power was held for long periods by
regents (notably those of the Sture family) chosen by the Swedish parliament.
King Christian II of Denmark, who asserted his claim to Sweden by force of arms,
ordered a massacre in 1520 of Swedish nobles in Stockholm. This came to be known
as the "Stockholm blood bath" and stirred the Swedish nobility to new resistance
and, on 6 June (now Sweden's national holiday) in 1523, they made Gustav Vasa
their king. This is sometimes considered as the foundation of modern Sweden.
Shortly afterwards he rejected Catholicism and led Sweden into the Protestant
Reformation.

The Hanseatic League had been officially formed at Lübeck on the Baltic coast of
Northern Germany in 1356. The Hanseatic League sought civil and commercial
privileges from the princes and royalty of the countries and cities along the
coasts of the Baltic Sea. In exchange, they offered a certain amount of
protection. Having their own navy, the Hansa were able to sweep the Baltic Sea
free of pirates. The privileges obtained by the Hansa included assurances that
only Hansa citizens would be allowed to trade from the ports where they were
located. They sought agreement to be free of all customs and taxes. With these
concessions, Lübeck merchants flocked to Stockholm, where they soon came to
dominate the city's economic life and made the port city of Stockholm into the
leading commercial and industrial city of Sweden. Under the Hanseatic trade,
two-thirds of Stockholm's imports consisted of textiles and one-third of salt.
The main exports from Sweden were iron and copper.

However, the Swedes began to resent the monopoly trading position of the Hansa
(mostly German citizens), and to resent the income they felt they lost to the
Hansa. Consequently, when Gustav Vasa or Gustav I broke the monopoly power of
the Hanseatic League he was regarded as a hero by the Swedish people. History
now views Gustav I as the father of the modern Swedish nation. The foundations
laid by Gustav would take time to develop. Furthermore, when Sweden did develop,
freed itself from the Hanseatic League, and entered its golden era, the fact
that the peasantry had traditionally been free meant that more of the economic
benefits flowed back to them rather than going to a feudal landowning class.

During the 17th century Sweden emerged as a European great power. Before the
emergence of the Swedish Empire, Sweden was a poor and scarcely populated
country on the fringe of European civilisation, with no significant power or
reputation. Sweden rose to prominence on a continental scale during the tenure
of king Gustavus Adolphus, seizing territories from Russia and Poland–Lithuania
in multiple conflicts, including the Thirty Years' War.

During the Thirty Years' War, Sweden conquered approximately half of the Holy
Roman states. Gustav Adolphus planned to become the new Holy Roman Emperor,
ruling over a united Scandinavia and the Holy Roman states, but he died at the
Battle of Lützen in 1632. After the Battle of Nördlingen, Sweden's only
significant military defeat of the war, pro-Swedish sentiment among the German
states faded. These German provinces excluded themselves from Swedish power one
by one, leaving Sweden with only a few northern German territories: Swedish
Pomerania, Bremen-Verden and Wismar.

In the middle of the 17th century Sweden was the third-largest country in Europe
by land area, only surpassed by Russia and Spain. Sweden reached its largest
territorial extent under the rule of Charles X after the treaty of Roskilde in
1658. The foundation of Sweden's success during this period is credited to
Gustav I's major changes to the Swedish economy in the 16th century, and his
introduction of Protestantism. In the 17th century, Sweden was engaged in many
wars, for example with the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, with both sides
competing for territories of today's Baltic states, with the disastrous Battle
of Kircholm being one of the highlights. One-third of the Finnish population
died in the devastating famine that struck the country in 1696. Famine also hit
Sweden, killing roughly 10% of Sweden's population.

The Swedes conducted a series of invasions into the Polish–Lithuanian
Commonwealth, known as the Deluge. After more than half a century of almost
constant warfare, the Swedish economy had deteriorated. It became the lifetime
task of Charles' son, Charles XI, to rebuild the economy and refit the army. His
legacy to his son, the coming ruler of Sweden, Charles XII, was one of the
finest arsenals in the world, a large standing army and a great fleet. Sweden's
largest threat at this time, Russia, had a larger army but was far behind in
both equipment and training.

After the Battle of Narva in 1700, one of the first battles of the Great
Northern War, the Russian army was so severely devastated that Sweden had an
open chance to invade Russia. However, Charles did not pursue the Russian army,
instead turning against Poland–Lithuania and defeating the Polish king, Augustus
II, and his Saxon allies at the Battle of Klissow in 1702. This gave Russia time
to rebuild and modernise its army.

After the success of invading Poland, Charles decided to make an attempt at
invading Russia, but this ended in a decisive Russian victory at the Battle of
Poltava in 1709. After a long march exposed to Cossack raids, the Russian Tsar
Peter the Great's scorched-earth techniques and the extremely cold winter of
1709, the Swedes stood weakened with a shattered morale and were enormously
outnumbered against the Russian army at Poltava. The defeat meant the beginning
of the end for the Swedish Empire. In addition, the plague raging in East
Central Europe devastated the Swedish dominions and reached Central Sweden in
1710.

Charles XII attempted to invade Norway in 1716, but he was shot dead at
Fredriksten fortress in 1718. The Swedes were not militarily defeated at
Fredriksten, but the whole structure and organisation of the campaign fell apart
with the king's death, and the army withdrew.

Forced to cede large areas of land in the Treaty of Nystad in 1721, Sweden also
lost its place as an empire and as the dominant state on the Baltic Sea. With
Sweden's lost influence, Russia emerged as an empire and became one of Europe's
dominant nations. As the war finally ended in 1721, Sweden had lost an estimated
200,000 men, 150,000 of those from the area of present-day Sweden and 50,000
from the Finnish part of Sweden.

In the 18th century, Sweden did not have enough resources to maintain its
territories outside Scandinavia, and most of them were lost, culminating with
the loss in 1809 of eastern Sweden to Russia, which became the highly autonomous
Grand Principality of Finland in Imperial Russia.

In interest of re-establishing Swedish dominance in the Baltic Sea, Sweden
allied itself against its traditional ally and benefactor, France, in the
Napoleonic Wars. Sweden's role in the Battle of Leipzig gave it the authority to
force Denmark–Norway, an ally of France, to cede Norway to the King of Sweden on
14 January 1814 in exchange for northern German provinces, at the Treaty of
Kiel. The Norwegian attempts to keep their status as a sovereign state were
rejected by the Swedish king, Charles XIII. He launched a military campaign
against Norway on 27 July 1814, ending in the Convention of Moss, which forced
Norway into a personal union with Sweden under the Swedish crown, which lasted
until 1905. The 1814 campaign was the last time Sweden was at war.

The Swedish East India Company, Ostindiska Kompaniet, began in 1731. The obvious
choice of home port was Gothenburg at Sweden's west coast, the mouth of Göta älv
river is very wide and has the county's largest and best harbour for high seas
journeys. The trade continued into the 19th Century, and caused the little town
to became Sweden's second city. There was a significant population increase
during the 18th and 19th centuries, which the writer Esaias Tegnér in 1833
attributed to "the peace, the smallpox vaccine, and the potatoes". Between 1750
and 1850, the population in Sweden doubled. According to some scholars, mass
emigration to America became the only way to prevent famine and rebellion; over
1% of the population emigrated annually during the 1880s. Nevertheless, Sweden
remained poor, retaining a nearly entirely agricultural economy even as Denmark
and Western European countries began to industrialise.

Many looked towards America for a better life during this time. It is thought
that between 1850 and 1910 more than one million Swedes moved to the United
States. In the early 20th century, more Swedes lived in Chicago than in
Gothenburg (Sweden's second largest city). Most Swedish immigrants moved to the
Midwestern United States, with a large population in Minnesota, with a few
others moving to other parts of the United States and Canada.

Despite the slow rate of industrialisation into the 19th century, many important
changes were taking place in the agrarian economy due to constant innovations
and a rapid population growth. These innovations included government-sponsored
programmes of enclosure, aggressive exploitation of agricultural lands, and the
introduction of new crops such as the potato. Because the Swedish peasantry had
never been enserfed as elsewhere in Europe, the Swedish farming culture began to
take on a critical role in Swedish politics, which has continued through modern
times with modern Agrarian party (now called the Centre Party). Between 1870 and
1914, Sweden began developing the industrialised economy that exists today.

Strong grassroots movements sprung up in Sweden during the latter half of the
19th century (trade unions, temperance groups, and independent religious
groups), creating a strong foundation of democratic principles. In 1889 The
Swedish Social Democratic Party was founded. These movements precipitated
Sweden's migration into a modern parliamentary democracy, achieved by the time
of World War I. As the Industrial Revolution progressed during the 20th century,
people gradually moved into cities to work in factories and became involved in
socialist unions. A communist revolution was avoided in 1917, following the
re-introduction of parliamentarism, and the country was democratised.

Sweden was officially neutral during World War I, although, under German
pressure, they did take steps which were detrimental to the Allied powers
including mining the Øresund channel, thus closing it to Allied shipping, and
allowing the Germans to use Swedish facilities and the Swedish cipher to
transmit secret messages to their overseas embassies. Sweden also allowed
volunteers fighting for the White Guards together with the Germans against the
Reds and Russians in the Finnish Civil War, and briefly occupied the Aland
islands in co-operation with Germany.

As in the first world war, Sweden remained officially neutral during World War
II, although its neutrality during World War II has been disputed. Sweden was
under German influence for much of the war, as ties to the rest of the world
were cut off through blockades. The Swedish government felt that it was in no
position to openly contest Germany, and therefore made some concessions. Sweden
also supplied steel and machined parts to Germany throughout the war. However,
Sweden supported Norwegian resistance, and in 1943 helped rescue Danish Jews
from deportation to Nazi concentration camps. The Swedish government also
unofficially supported Finland in the Winter War and the Continuation War by
allowing volunteers and materiel to be shipped to Finland.

During the last year of the war, Sweden began to play a role in humanitarian
efforts, and many refugees, among them several thousand Jews from Nazi-occupied
Europe, were rescued thanks to the Swedish rescue missions to internment camps
and partly because Sweden served as a haven for refugees, primarily from the
Nordic countries and the Baltic states. The Swedish diplomat Raoul Wallenberg
and his colleagues ensured the safety of tens of thousands of Hungarian Jews.
Nevertheless, both Swedes and others have argued that Sweden could have done
more to oppose the Nazis' war efforts, even if it meant increasing the risk of
occupation.

Sweden was officially a neutral country and remained outside NATO and Warsaw
Pact membership during the Cold War, but privately Sweden's leadership had
strong ties with the United States and other western governments. Following the
war, Sweden took advantage of an intact industrial base, social stability and
its natural resources to expand its industry to supply the rebuilding of Europe.
Sweden received aid under the Marshall Plan and participated in the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). During most of the post-war
era, the country was governed by the Swedish Social Democratic Party largely in
co-operation with trade unions and industry. The government actively pursued an
internationally competitive manufacturing sector of primarily large
corporations.

Sweden was one of the founding states of the European Free Trade Area (EFTA).
During the 1960s the EFTA countries were often referred to as the Outer Seven,
as opposed to the Inner Six of the then-European Economic Community (EEC).

Sweden, like countries around the globe, entered a period of economic decline
and upheaval following the oil embargoes of 1973–74 and 1978–79. In the 1980s
pillars of Swedish industry were massively restructured.[by whom?] Shipbuilding
was discontinued, wood pulp was integrated into modernised paper production, the
steel industry was concentrated and specialised, and mechanical engineering was
robotised.

Between 1970 and 1990 the overall tax burden rose by over 10%, and the growth
was low compared to other countries in Western Europe. Eventually government
began to spend over half of the country's gross domestic product. Sweden GDP per
capita ranking declined during this time.

A bursting real estate bubble caused by inadequate controls on lending combined
with an international recession and a policy switch from anti-unemployment
policies to anti-inflationary policies resulted in a fiscal crisis in the early
1990s. Sweden's GDP declined by around 5%. In 1992, a run on the currency caused
the central bank to briefly increase interest rates to 500%.

The response of the government was to cut spending and institute a multitude of
reforms to improve Sweden's competitiveness, among them reducing the welfare
state and privatising public services and goods. Much of the political
establishment promoted EU membership, and a referendum passed with 52.3% in
favour of joining the EU on 13 November 1994. Sweden joined the European Union
on 1 January 1995. In a 2003 referendum the Swedish electorate voted against the
country joining the Euro currency. In 2006 Sweden got its first majority
government for decades as the centre-right Alliance defeated the incumbent
Social Democrat government. Following the rapid growth of anti-immigration
Sweden Democrats and their entrance to the Riksdag in 2010 the Alliance became a
minority cabinet.

Sweden remains non-aligned militarily, although it participates in some joint
military exercises with NATO and some other countries, in addition to extensive
co-operation with other European countries in the area of defence technology and
defence industry. Among others, Swedish companies export weapons that were used
by the American military in Iraq. Sweden also has a long history of
participating in international military operations, including most recently,
Afghanistan, where Swedish troops are under NATO command, and in EU sponsored
peacekeeping operations in Kosovo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Cyprus. Sweden
also participated in enforcing a UN mandated no-fly zone over Libya during the
Arab Spring. Sweden held the chair of the European Union from 1 July to 31
December 2009.

In recent decades Sweden has become a more culturally diverse nation due to
significant immigration; in 2013 it was estimated that 15 per cent of the
population was foreign-born, and an additional 5 per cent of the population were
born to two immigrant parents. The influx of immigrants has brought new social
challenges. Violent incidents have periodically occurred including the 2013
Stockholm riots which broke out following the police shooting of an elderly
Portuguese immigrant. In response to these violent events, the anti-immigration
opposition party, the Swedish Democrats, promoted their anti-immigration
policies, while the left-wing opposition blamed growing inequality caused by the
centre-right government's socioeconomic policies.

In 2014 Stefan Löfven won the General Election and became the new Swedish Prime
Minister. The Sweden Democrats held the balance of power and voted the
government's budget down in the Riksdag, but due to agreements between the
government and the Alliance, the government was able to hang onto power. Sweden
was heavily affected by the 2015 European migrant crisis, forcing the government
to tighten regulations of entry to the country, as Sweden received thousands of
asylum seekers per week during the autumn, overwhelming existing structures.

Situated in Northern Europe, Sweden lies west of the Baltic Sea and Gulf of
Bothnia, providing a long coastline, and forms the eastern part of the
Scandinavian Peninsula. To the west is the Scandinavian mountain chain
(Skanderna), a range that separates Sweden from Norway. Finland is located to
its north-east. It has maritime borders with Denmark, Germany, Poland, Russia,
Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia, and it is also linked to Denmark (south-west) by
the Öresund Bridge. Its border with Norway (1,619 km long) is the longest
uninterrupted border within Europe.

Sweden lies between latitudes 55° and 70° N, and mostly between longitudes 11°
and 25° E (part of Stora Drammen island is just west of 11°).

At 449,964 km2 (173,732 sq mi), Sweden is the 55th-largest country in the world,
the 4th-largest country entirely in Europe, and the largest in Northern Europe.
The lowest elevation in Sweden is in the bay of Lake Hammarsjön, near
Kristianstad, at −2.41 m (−7.91 ft) below sea level. The highest point is
Kebnekaise at 2,111 m (6,926 ft) above sea level.

Sweden has 25 provinces or landskap (landscapes), based on culture, geography
and history. While these provinces serve no political or administrative purpose,
they play an important role in people's self-identity. The provinces are usually
grouped together in three large lands, parts, the northern Norrland, the central
Svealand and southern Götaland. The sparsely populated Norrland encompasses
almost 60% of the country. Sweden also has the Vindelfjällen Nature Reserve, one
of the largest protected areas in Europe, totaling 562,772 ha (approx.
5,628 km2).

About 15% of Sweden lies north of the Arctic Circle. Southern Sweden is
predominantly agricultural, with increasing forest coverage northward. Around
65% of Sweden's total land area is covered with forests. The highest population
density is in the Öresund Region in southern Sweden, along the western coast up
to central Bohuslän, and in the valley of lake Mälaren and Stockholm. Gotland
and Öland are Sweden's largest islands; Vänern and Vättern are its largest
lakes. Vänern is the third largest in Europe, after Lake Ladoga and Lake Onega
in Russia. Combined with the third and fourth largest lakes Mälaren and
Hjälmaren, these lakes take up a significant part of the southern Sweden's area.
Sweden's extensive waterway availability throughout the south was exploited with
the building of the Göta Canal in the 19th century, shortening the potential
distance between the Baltic Sea south of Norrköping and Gothenburg by using the
lake and river network to facilitate the canal.

Most of Sweden has a temperate climate, despite its northern latitude, with
largely four distinct seasons and mild temperatures throughout the year. The
winter in the far south is usually weak and is only manifested through some
shorter periods with snow and sub-zero temperatures, autumn may well turn into
spring there, without a distinct period of winter. The country can be divided
into three types of climate: the southernmost part has an oceanic climate, the
central part has a humid continental climate and the northernmost part has a
subarctic climate. However, Sweden is much warmer and drier than other places at
a similar latitude, and even somewhat farther south, mainly because of the
combination of the Gulf Stream and the general west wind drift, caused by the
direction of planet Earth's rotation. Continental west-coasts (to which entire
Scandinavia belongs, as the westernmost part of the Euraisian continent) are
notably warmer than continental east-coasts. (This can also be seen by comparing
f.i. the Canadian cities of Vancouver and Halifax with each other, the winter at
west coast Vancouver is the much milder one.) And for example, central and
southern Sweden has much milder winters than many parts of Russia, Canada, and
the northern United States. Because of its high latitude, the length of daylight
varies greatly. North of the Arctic Circle, the sun never sets for part of each
summer, and it never rises for part of each winter. In the capital, Stockholm,
daylight lasts for more than 18 hours in late June but only around 6 hours in
late December. Sweden receives between 1,100 and 1,900 hours of sunshine
annually. During July are the temperature difference between north and south not
large. With exception of the mountains has the entire country a July-average
temperature within the range of +15.0 C to + 17.5 C (a difference of 2.5
degrees), while the January-average temperatures varies between the freezing
point down to below -15 C along the border to Finland (a difference of 15
degrees)

The highest temperature ever recorded in Sweden was 38 °C (100 °F) in Målilla in
1947, while the coldest temperature ever recorded was −52.6 °C (−62.7 °F) in
Vuoggatjålme in 1966. Temperatures expected in Sweden are heavily influenced by
the large Fennoscandian landmass, as well as continental Europe and western
Russia, which allows hot or cool inland air to be easily transported to Sweden.
That in turn renders most of Sweden's southern areas having warmer summers than
almost everywhere in the nearby British Isles, even matching temperatures found
along the continental Atlantic coast as far south as in northern Spain. In
winter however the same high-pressure systems sometimes puts the entire country
far below freezing temperatures. There is some maritime moderation from the
Atlantic which renders the Swedish continental climate less severe than that of
nearby Russia. Even though temperature patterns differ between north and south,
the summer climate is surprisingly similar all through the entire country in
spite of the large latitudal differences. This is due to the south being
surrounded by a greater mass of water, with the wider Baltic Sea and the
Atlantic air passing over lowland areas from the south-west.

Apart from the ice-free Atlantic bringing marine air into Sweden tempering
winters, the mildness is further explained by prevailing low-pressure systems
postponing winter, with the long nights often staying above freezing in the
south of the country due to the abundant cloud cover. By the time winter finally
breaks through, daylight hours rise quickly, ensuring that daytime temperatures
soar quickly in spring. With the greater number of clear nights, frosts remain
commonplace quite far south as late as April. The cold winters occur when
low-pressure systems are weaker. An example is that the coldest ever month
(January 1987) in Stockholm was also the sunniest January month on record.

The relative strength of low and high-pressure systems of marine and continental
air also define the highly variable summers. When hot continental air hits the
country, the long days and short nights frequently bring temperatures up to
30 °C (86 °F) or above even in coastal areas. Nights normally remain cool,
especially in inland areas. Coastal areas can see so-called tropical nights
above 20 °C (68 °F) occur due to the moderating sea influence during warmer
summers. Summers can be cool, especially in the north of the country.
Transitional seasons are normally quite extensive and the four-season climate
applies to most of Sweden's territory, except in Scania where some years do not
record a meteorological winter (see table below) or in the high Lapland
mountains where polar microclimates exist.

On average, most of Sweden receives between 500 and 800 mm (20 and 31 in) of
precipitation each year, making it considerably drier than the global average.
The south-western part of the country receives more precipitation, between 1,000
and 1,200 mm (39 and 47 in), and some mountain areas in the north are estimated
to receive up to 2,000 mm (79 in). Despite northerly locations, southern and
central Sweden may have almost no snow in some winters. Most of Sweden is
located in the rain shadow of the Scandinavian Mountains through Norway and
north-west Sweden. The blocking of cool and wet air in summer as well as the
greater landmass leads to warm and dry summers far north in the country, with
quite warm summers at the Bothnia Bay coast at 65 degrees latitude, which is
unheard of elsewhere in the world at such northerly coastlines.

Swedish Meteorological Institute, SMHI's monthly average temperatures of some of
their weather stations – for the latest scientific full prefixed thirty-year
period 1961–1990 Next will be presented in year 2020. The weather stations are
sorted from south towards north by their numbers.

Sweden has four fundamental laws (Swedish: grundlagar) which together forms the
Constitution: the Instrument of Government (Swedish: Regeringsformen), the Act
of Succession (Swedish: Successionsordningen), the Freedom of the Press Act
(Swedish: Tryckfrihetsförordningen), and the Fundamental Law on Freedom of
Expression (Swedish: Yttrandefrihetsgrundlagen).

The public sector in Sweden is divided into two parts: the legal person known as
the State (Swedish: staten)[b] and local authorities:[c] the latter includes
regional County Councils (Swedish: landsting) and local Municipalities (Swedish:
kommuner). The local authorities, rather than the State, make up the larger part
of the public sector in Sweden. County Councils and Municipalities are
independent of one another, the former merely covers a larger geographical area
than the latter. The local authorities have self-rule, as mandated by the
Constitution, and their own tax base. Notwithstanding their self-rule, local
authorities are nevertheless in practice interdependent upon the State, as the
parameters of their responsibilities and the extent of their jurisdiction is
specified in the Local Government Act (Swedish: Kommunallagen) passed by the
Riksdag.

Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and King Carl XVI Gustaf is the head of
state, but the role of the monarch is limited to ceremonial and representative
functions. Under the provisions of the 1974 Instrument of Government, the King
lacks any formal political power. The King opens the annual Riksdag session,
chairs the Special Council held during a change of Government, holds regular
Information Councils with the Prime Minister and the Government, chairs the
meetings of the Advisory Council on Foreign Affairs (Swedish: Utrikesnämnden),
and receives Letters of Credence of foreign ambassadors to Sweden and signs
those of Swedish ambassadors sent abroad. In addition, the King pays State
Visits abroad and receives those incoming as host. Apart from strictly official
duties, the King and the other members of Royal Family undertake a variety of
unofficial and other representative duties within Sweden and abroad.

Legislative power is vested in the unicameral Riksdag with 349 members. General
elections are held every four years, on the second Sunday of September.
Legislation may be initiated by the Government or by members of the Riksdag.
Members are elected on the basis of proportional representation to a four-year
term. The internal workings of the Riksdag is, in addition to the Instrument of
Government, regulated by the Riksdag Act (Swedish: Riksdagsordningen). The
fundamental laws can be altered by the Riksdag alone; only an absolute majority
with two separate votes, separated by a general election in between, is
required.

The Government (Swedish: Regeringen) operates as a collegial body with
collective responsibility and consists of the Prime Minister — appointed and
dismissed by the Speaker of the Riksdag (following an actual vote in the Riksdag
before an appointment can be made) — and other cabinet ministers (Swedish:
Statsråd), appointed and dismissed at the sole discretion of the Prime Minister.
The Government is the supreme executive authority and is responsible for its
actions to the Riksdag.

Most of the State administrative authorities (Swedish: statliga
förvaltningsmyndigheter) report to the Government, including (but not limited
to) the Armed Forces, the Enforcement Authority, the National Library, the
Swedish police and the Tax Agency. A unique feature of Swedish State
administration is that individual cabinet ministers do not bear any individual
ministerial responsibility for the performance of the agencies within their
portfolio; as the director-generals and other heads of government agencies
reports directly to the Government as a whole; and individual ministers are
prohibited to interfere; thus the origin of the pejorative in Swedish political
parlance term ministerstyre (English: "ministerial rule") in matters that are to
be handled by the individual agencies, unless otherwise specifically provided
for in law.

The Judiciary is independent from the Riksdag, Government and other State
administrative authorities. The role of judicial review of legislation is not
practised by the courts; instead, the Council on Legislation gives non-binding
opinions on legality. There is no stare decisis in that courts are not bound by
precedent, although it is influential.

The Swedish Social Democratic Party has played a leading role in Swedish
politics since 1917, after the Reformists had confirmed their strength and the
left-wing revolutionaries formed their own party. After 1932, most governments
have been dominated by the Social Democrats. Only five general elections since
World War II—1976, 1979, 1991, 2006 and 2010—have given the assembled bloc of
centre-right parties enough seats in the Riksdag to form a government.

For over 50 years, Sweden had had five parties who continually received enough
votes to gain seats in the Riksdag—the Social Democrats, the Moderate Party, the
Centre Party, the Liberal People's Party and the Left Party—before the Green
Party became the sixth party in the 1988 election. In the 1991 election, while
the Greens lost their seats, two new parties gained seats for the first time:
the Christian Democrats and New Democracy. The 1994 election saw the return of
the Greens and the demise of New Democracy. It was not until elections in 2010
that an eighth party, the Sweden Democrats, gained Riksdag seats. In the
elections to the European Parliament, parties who have failed to pass the
Riksdag threshold have managed to gain representation at that venue: the June
List (2004–2009), the Pirate Party (2009–2014), and Feminist Initiative
(2014–present).

In the 2006 general election the Moderate Party formed the centre-right Alliance
for Sweden bloc and won a majority of the Riksdag seats. In the 2010 general
election the Alliance contended against a unified left block consisting of the
Social Democrats, the Greens and the Left Party. The Alliance won a plurality of
173 seats, but remained two seats short of a 175-seat majority. Nevertheless,
neither the Alliance, nor the left block, chose to form a coalition with the
Sweden Democrats.

The outcome of the 2014 general election resulted in the attainment of more
seats by the three centre-left parties in comparison to the centre-right
Alliance for Sweden, with the two blocs receiving 159 and 141 seats
respectively. The non-aligned Sweden Democrats more than doubled their support
and won the remaining 49 seats. On 3 October 2014, Stefan Löfven, formed a
minority government consisting of the Social Democrats and the Greens.

Election turnout in Sweden has always been high by international comparison.
Although it declined in recent decades, the latest elections saw an increase in
voter turnout (80.11% in 2002, 81.99% in 2006, 84.63% in 2010) and 85.81 in
2014. Swedish politicians enjoyed a high degree of confidence from the citizens
in the 1960s, However, that level of confidence has since declined steadily, and
is now at a markedly lower level than in its Scandinavian neighbours.

Sweden is a unitary state divided into 20 county councils (landsting) and 290
municipalities (kommuner). Every county council corresponds to a county (län)
with a number of municipalities per county with the exception of Gotland. County
councils and municipalities have different roles and separate responsibilities
relating to local government. Health care, public transport and certain cultural
institutions are administered by county councils. Preschools, primary and
secondary schooling, public water utilities, garbage disposal, elderly care and
rescue services are administered by the municipalities. The only exception is
Gotland Municipality which also has the responsibilities of a county council.

Municipal and county council government in Sweden is similar to city commission
and cabinet-style council government. Both levels have legislative assemblies
(municipal councils and county council assemblies) of between 31 and 101 members
(always an uneven number) that are elected from party-list proportional
representation at the general election which are held every four years in
conjunction with the national parliamentary elections.

Municipalities are also divided into a total of 2,512 parishes (församlingar).
These have no official political responsibilities but are traditional
subdivisions of the Church of Sweden and still have some importance as census
districts for census-taking and elections.

The Swedish government has 21 County Administrative Boards (Swedish:
länsstyrelser), which are responsible for regional state administration not
assigned to other government agencies or local government. Each county
administrative boards is led by a County Governor (Swedish: landshövding)
appointed for a term of six years. The list of previous officeholders for the
counties stretches back, in most cases, to 1634 when the counties were created
by Lord High Chancellor Count Axel Oxenstierna. The main responsibility of the
County Administrative Board is to co-ordinate the development of the county in
line with goals set by the Riksdag and Government.

The actual age of the kingdom of Sweden is unknown. Establishing the age depends
mostly on whether Sweden should be considered a nation when the Svear (Sweonas)
ruled Svealand or if the emergence of the nation started with the Svear and the
Götar (Geats) of Götaland being united under one ruler. In the first case,
Svealand was first mentioned as having one single ruler in the year 98 by
Tacitus, but it is almost impossible to know for how long it had been this way.
However, historians usually start the line of Swedish monarchs from when
Svealand and Götaland were ruled under the same king, namely Eric the Victorious
(Geat) and his son Olof Skötkonung in the 10th century. These events are often
described as the consolidation of Sweden, although substantial areas were
conquered and incorporated later.

Earlier kings, for which no reliable historical sources exist, can be read about
in mythical kings of Sweden and semi-legendary kings of Sweden. Many of these
kings are only mentioned in various saga and blend with Norse mythology.

The title Sveriges och Götes Konung was last used for Gustaf I of Sweden, after
which the title became "King of Sweden, of the Goths and of the Wends"
(Sveriges, Götes och Vendes Konung) in official documentation. Up until the
beginning of the 1920s, all laws in Sweden were introduced with the words, "We,
the king of Sweden, of the Goths and Wends". This title was used up until 1973.
The present King of Sweden, Carl XVI Gustaf, was the first monarch officially
proclaimed "King of Sweden" (Sveriges Konung) with no additional peoples
mentioned in his title.

The term riksdag was used for the first time in the 1540s, although the first
meeting where representatives of different social groups were called to discuss
and determine affairs affecting the country as a whole took place as early as
1435, in the town of Arboga. During the Riksdag assemblies of 1527 and 1544,
under King Gustav Vasa, representatives of all four estates of the realm
(clergy, nobility, townsmen and peasants) were called on to participate for the
first time. The monarchy became hereditary in 1544.

Executive power was historically shared between the King and an aristocratic
Privy council until 1680, followed by the King's autocratic rule initiated by
the commoner estates of the Riksdag. As a reaction to the failed Great Northern
War, a parliamentary system was introduced in 1719, followed by three different
flavours of constitutional monarchy in 1772, 1789 and 1809, the latter granting
several civil liberties. Already during the first of those three periods, the
‘Era of Liberty’ (1719–72) the Swedish Rikstag had developed into a very active
Parliament, and this tradition continued into the nineteenth century, laying the
basis for the transition towards modern democracy at the end of that century.

In 1866 Sweden became a constitutional monarchy with a bicameral parliament,
with the First Chamber indirectly elected by local governments, and the Second
Chamber directly elected in national elections every four years. In 1971 the
parliament became unicameral. Legislative power was (symbolically) shared
between the King and the Riksdag until 1975. Swedish taxation is controlled by
the Riksdag.

Sweden has a history of strong political involvement by ordinary people through
its "popular movements" (Folkrörelser), the most notable being trade unions, the
independent Christian movement, the temperance movement, the women's movement
and more recently the intellectual property pirate movements. Sweden was the
first country in the world to outlaw corporal punishment of children by their
parents (parents' right to spank their own children was first removed in 1966,
and it was explicitly prohibited by law from July 1979).

Sweden is currently leading the EU in statistics measuring equality in the
political system and equality in the education system. The Global Gender Gap
Report 2006 ranked Sweden as the number one country in terms of gender equality.

Some Swedish political figures have become known worldwide, among these are:
Raoul Wallenberg, Folke Bernadotte, the former Secretary-General of the United
Nations Dag Hammarskjöld, the former Prime Minister Olof Palme, the former Prime
Minister and later Foreign minister Carl Bildt, the former President of the
General Assembly of the United Nations Jan Eliasson, and the former
International Atomic Energy Agency Iraq inspector Hans Blix.

The courts are divided into two parallel and separate systems: The general
courts (allmänna domstolar) for criminal and civil cases, and general
administrative courts (allmänna förvaltningsdomstolar) for cases relating to
disputes between private persons and the authorities. Each of these systems has
three tiers, where the top tier court of the respective system typically only
will hear cases that may become precedent. There are also a number of special
courts, which will hear a narrower set of cases, as set down by legislation.
While independent in their rulings, some of these courts are operated as
divisions within courts of the general or general administrative courts.

The Supreme Court of Sweden (Swedish: Högsta domstolen) is the third and final
instance in all civil and criminal cases in Sweden. Before a case can be decided
by the Supreme Court, leave to appeal must be obtained, and with few exceptions,
leave to appeal can be granted only when the case is of interest as a precedent.
The Supreme Court consists of 16 Justices (Swedish: justitieråd), appointed by
the Government, but the court as an institution is independent of the Riksdag,
and the Government is not able to interfere with the decisions of the court.

According to a victimisation survey of 1,201 residents in 2005, Sweden has
above-average crime rates compared to other EU countries. Sweden has high or
above-average levels of assaults, sexual assaults, hate crimes, and consumer
fraud. Sweden has low levels of burglary, car theft and drug problems. Bribe
seeking is rare.

A mid-November 2013 news report announced that four prisons in Sweden were
closed during the year due to a significant drop in the number of inmates. The
decrease in the number of Swedish prisoners was considered "out-of-the-ordinary"
by the head of Sweden's prison and probation services, with prison numbers in
Sweden falling by around 1% a year since 2004. Prisons were closed in the towns
of Åby, Håja, Båtshagen, and Kristianstad.

Throughout the 20th century, Swedish foreign policy was based on the principle
of non-alignment in peacetime and neutrality in wartime. Sweden's government
pursued an independent course of nonalignment in times of peace so that
neutrality would be possible in the event of war.

Sweden's doctrine of neutrality is often traced back to the 19th century as the
country has not been in a state of war since the end of the Swedish campaign
against Norway in 1814. During World War II Sweden joined neither the allied nor
axis powers. This has sometimes been disputed since in effect Sweden allowed in
select cases the Nazi regime to use its railroad system to transport troops and
goods, especially iron ore from mines in northern Sweden, which was vital to the
German war machine. However, Sweden also indirectly contributed to the defence
of Finland in the Winter War, and permitted the training of Norwegian and Danish
troops in Sweden after 1943.

During the early Cold War era, Sweden combined its policy of non-alignment and a
low profile in international affairs with a security policy based on strong
national defence. The function of the Swedish military was to deter attack. At
the same time, the country maintained relatively close informal connections with
the Western bloc, especially in the realm of intelligence exchange. In 1952, a
Swedish DC-3 was shot down over the Baltic Sea by a Soviet MiG-15 jet fighter.
Later investigations revealed that the plane was actually gathering information
for NATO. Another plane, a Catalina search and rescue plane, was sent out a few
days later and shot down by the Soviets as well. Prime Minister Olof Palme made
an official visit to Cuba during the 1970s, during which he denounced Fulgencio
Batista's government and praised contemporary Cuban and Cambodian
revolutionaries in a speech.

Beginning in the late 1960s, Sweden attempted to play a more significant and
independent role in international relations. It involved itself significantly in
international peace efforts, especially through the United Nations, and in
support to the Third World.

On 27 October 1981, a Whiskey-class submarine (U 137) from the Soviet Union ran
aground close to the naval base at Karlskrona in the southern part of the
country. Research has never clearly established whether the submarine ended up
on the shoals through a navigational mistake or if an enemy committed espionage
against Swedish military potential. The incident triggered a diplomatic crisis
between Sweden and the Soviet Union. The 1986 assassination of Olof Palme and
with the end of the Cold War, Sweden has adopted a more traditional foreign
policy approach. Nevertheless, the country remains active in peace keeping
missions and maintains a considerable foreign aid budget.

The law is enforced in Sweden by several government entities. The Swedish police
is a Government agency concerned with police matters. The National Task Force is
a national SWAT unit within the Police Service. The Swedish Security Service's
responsibilities are counter-espionage, anti-terrorist activities, protection of
the constitution and protection of sensitive objects and people.

Försvarsmakten (Swedish Armed Forces) is a government agency reporting to the
Swedish Ministry of Defence and responsible for the peacetime operation of the
armed forces of Sweden. The primary task of the agency is to train and deploy
peace support forces abroad, while maintaining the long-term ability to refocus
on the defence of Sweden in the event of war. The armed forces are divided into
Army, Air Force and Navy. The head of the armed forces is the Supreme Commander
(Överbefälhavaren, ÖB), the most senior commissioned officer in the country. Up
to 1974 the King was pro forma Commander-in-Chief, but in reality it was clearly
understood all through the 20th century that the Monarch would have no active
role as a military leader.

Until the end of the Cold War, nearly all males reaching the age of military
service were conscripted. In recent years, the number of conscripted males has
shrunk dramatically, while the number of female volunteers has increased
slightly. Recruitment has generally shifted towards finding the most motivated
recruits, rather than solely those otherwise most fit for service. All soldiers
serving abroad must by law be volunteers. In 1975 the total number of conscripts
was 45,000. By 2003 it was down to 15,000.

On 1 July 2010 Sweden stopped routine conscription, switching to an all
volunteer force unless otherwise required for defence readiness. The need to
recruit only the soldiers later prepared to volunteer for international service
will be emphasised. The total forces gathered would consist of about 60,000 men.
This could be compared with the 1980s before the fall of the Soviet Union, when
Sweden could gather up to 1,000,000 men.

Currently, one of the most important tasks for the Swedish Armed Forces has been
to form a Swedish-led EU Battle Group to which Norway, Finland, Ireland and
Estonia will also contribute. The Nordic Battle Group (NBG) had a 10-day
deployment readiness during the first half of 2008 and, although Swedish-led,
had its Operational Headquarters (OHQ) in Northwood, outside London.

Sweden is the seventh-richest country in the world in terms of GDP (gross
domestic product) per capita and a high standard of living is experienced by its
citizens. Sweden is an export-oriented mixed economy. Timber, hydropower and
iron ore constitute the resource base of an economy with a heavy emphasis on
foreign trade. Sweden's engineering sector accounts for 50% of output and
exports, while telecommunications, the automotive industry and the
pharmaceutical industries are also of great importance. Sweden is the
ninth-largest arms exporter in the world. Agriculture accounts for 2% of GDP and
employment. The country ranks among the highest for telephone and Internet
access penetration.

Trade unions, employers' associations and collective agreements cover a large
share of the employees in Sweden. When the Swedish Ghent system was changed in
2007, resulting in considerably raised fees to unemployment funds, a substantial
decline in union density and density of unemployment funds occurred.

In 2010 Sweden's income Gini coefficient was the third lowest among developed
countries, at 0.25—slightly higher than Japan and Denmark—suggesting Sweden had
low income inequality. However, Sweden's wealth Gini coefficient at 0.853 was
the second highest in developed countries, and above European and North American
averages, suggesting high wealth inequality. Even on a disposable income basis,
the geographical distribution of Gini coefficient of income inequality varies
within different regions and municipalities of Sweden. Danderyd, outside
Stockholm, has Sweden's highest Gini coefficient of income inequality, at 0.55,
while Hofors near Gävle has the lowest at 0.25. In and around Stockholm and
Scania, two of the more densely populated regions of Sweden, the income Gini
coefficient is between 0.35 and 0.55.

In terms of structure, the Swedish economy is characterised by a large,
knowledge-intensive and export-oriented manufacturing sector; an increasing, but
comparatively small, business service sector; and by international standards, a
large public service sector. Large organisations, both in manufacturing and
services, dominate the Swedish economy. High and medium-high technology
manufacturing accounts for 9.9% of GDP.

The 20 largest (by turnover) registered Swedish companies in 2007 were Volvo,
Ericsson, Vattenfall, Skanska, Sony Ericsson Mobile Communications AB, Svenska
Cellulosa Aktiebolaget, Electrolux, Volvo Personvagnar, TeliaSonera, Sandvik,
Scania, ICA, Hennes & Mauritz, IKEA, Nordea, Preem, Atlas Copco, Securitas,
Nordstjernan and SKF. The vast majority of Sweden's industry is privately
controlled, unlike many other industrialised Western countries, and, in
accordance with a historical standard, publicly owned enterprises are of minor
importance.

An estimated 4.5 million Swedish residents are employed and around a third of
the workforce completed tertiary education. In terms of GDP per-hour-worked,
Sweden was the world's ninth highest in 2006 at US$31, compared to US$22 in
Spain and US$35 in the United States. GDP per-hour-worked is growing 2.5% per
year for the economy as a whole and the trade-terms-balanced productivity growth
is 2%. According to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD), deregulation, globalisation, and technology sector growth have been key
productivity drivers. Sweden is a world leader in privatised pensions and
pension funding problems are relatively small compared to many other Western
European countries. A pilot program to test the feasibility of a six-hour
workday, without loss of pay, will commence in 2014, involving the participation
of Gothenburg municipal staff. The Swedish government is seeking to reduce its
costs through decreased sick leave hours and increased efficiency.

The typical worker receives 40% of his or her labour costs after the tax wedge.
Total tax collected by Sweden as a percentage of its GDP peaked at 52.3% in
1990. The country faced a real estate and banking crisis in 1990–1991, and
consequently passed tax reforms in 1991 to implement tax rate cuts and tax base
broadening over time. Since 1990, taxes as a percentage of GDP collected by
Sweden has been dropping, with total tax rates for the highest income earners
dropping the most. In 2010 45.8% of the country's GDP was collected as taxes,
the second highest among OECD countries, and nearly double the percentage in the
US or South Korea. Tax income-financed employment represents a third of the
Swedish workforce, a substantially higher proportion than in most other
countries. Overall, GDP growth has been fast since reforms—especially those in
manufacturing—were enacted in the early 1990s.

Sweden is the fourth-most competitive economy in the world, according to the
World Economic Forum in its Global Competitiveness Report 2012–2013. Sweden is
the top performing country in the 2014 Global Green Economy Index (GGEI). Sweden
is ranked fourth in the IMD World Competitiveness Yearbook 2013. According to
the book The Flight of the Creative Class by the US economist Professor Richard
Florida of the University of Toronto, Sweden is ranked as having the best
creativity in Europe for business and is predicted to become a talent magnet for
the world's most purposeful workers. The book compiled an index to measure the
kind of creativity it claims is most useful to business—talent, technology and
tolerance.

Sweden maintains its own currency, the Swedish krona (SEK), a result of the
Swedes having rejected the euro in a referendum. The Swedish Riksbank—founded in
1668 and thus the oldest central bank in the world—is currently focusing on
price stability with an inflation target of 2%. According to the Economic Survey
of Sweden 2007 by the OECD, the average inflation in Sweden has been one of the
lowest among European countries since the mid-1990s, largely because of
deregulation and quick utilisation of globalisation.

Financial deregulation in the 1980s impacted adversely on the property market,
leading to a bubble and eventually a crash in the early 1990s. Commercial
property prices fell by up to two thirds, resulting in two Swedish banks having
to be taken over by the government. In the following two decades the property
sector strengthened. By 2014, legislators, economists and the IMF were again
warning of a bubble with residential property prices soaring and the level of
personal mortgage debt expanding. Household debt-to-income rose above 170% as
the IMF was calling on legislators to consider zoning reform and other means of
generating a greater supply of housing as demand was outstripping what was
available, pushing prices higher. By August 2014, 40% of home borrowers had
interest-only loans while those that didn't were repaying principal at a rate
that would take 100 years to fully repay.

Sweden's energy market is largely privatised. The Nordic energy market is one of
the first liberalised energy markets in Europe and it is traded in NASDAQ OMX
Commodities Europe and Nord Pool Spot. In 2006, out of a total electricity
production of 139 TWh, electricity from hydropower accounted for 61 TWh (44%),
and nuclear power delivered 65 TWh (47%). At the same time, the use of biofuels,
peat etc. produced 13 TWh (9%) of electricity, while wind power produced 1 TWh
(1%). Sweden was a net importer of electricity by a margin of 6 TWh. Biomass is
mainly used to produce heat for district heating and central heating and
industry processes.

The 1973 oil crisis strengthened Sweden's commitment to decrease dependence on
imported fossil fuels. Since then, electricity has been generated mostly from
hydropower and nuclear power. The use of nuclear power has been limited,
however. Among other things, the accident of Three Mile Island Nuclear
Generating Station (United States) prompted the Riksdag to ban new nuclear
plants. In March 2005, an opinion poll showed that 83% supported maintaining or
increasing nuclear power. Politicians have made announcements about oil
phase-out in Sweden, decrease of nuclear power, and multibillion-dollar
investments in renewable energy and energy efficiency. The country has for many
years pursued a strategy of indirect taxation as an instrument of environmental
policy, including energy taxes in general and carbon dioxide taxes in
particular. Sweden was in 2014 a net exporter of electricity by a margin of 16
TWh, the production from windpower mills had increased to 11.5 TWh.

Sweden has 162,707 km (101,101 mi) of paved road and 1,428 km (887 mi) of
expressways. Motorways run through Sweden, Denmark and over the Øresund Bridge
to Stockholm, Gothenburg, Uppsala and Uddevalla. The system of motorways is
still under construction and a new motorway from Uppsala to Gävle was finished
on 17 October 2007. Sweden had left-hand traffic (Vänstertrafik in Swedish) from
approximately 1736 and continued to do so well into the 20th century. Voters
rejected right-hand traffic in 1955, but after the Riksdag passed legislation in
1963 changeover took place in 1967, known in Swedish as Dagen H.

The Stockholm metro is the only subway system in Sweden and serves the city of
Stockholm via 100 stations. The rail transport market is privatised, but while
there are many privately owned enterprises, many operators are still owned by
state. The counties have financing, ticket and marketing responsibility for
local trains. For other trains the operators handle tickets and marketing
themselves. Operators include SJ, Veolia Transport, DSB, Green Cargo,
Tågkompaniet and Inlandsbanan. Most of the railways are owned and operated by
Trafikverket. Most tram nets were closed in 1967, as Sweden changed from
left-side to right-side driving, but they survived in Norrköping and Gothenburg.

The largest airports include Stockholm–Arlanda Airport (16.1 million passengers
in 2009) 40 km (25 mi) north of Stockholm, Göteborg Landvetter Airport (4.3
million passengers in 2008), and Stockholm–Skavsta Airport (2.0 million
passengers). Sweden hosts the two largest port companies in Scandinavia, Port of
Göteborg AB (Gothenburg) and the transnational company Copenhagen Malmö Port AB.
The most used airport for a large part of Southern Sweden is Kastrup or
Copenhagen Airport which is located only 12 minutes by train from the closest
Swedish railway station, Hyllie. Copenhagen Airport also is the largest
international airport in Scandinavia and Finland.

Sweden also has a number of car ferry connections to several neighbouring
countries. This includes a route from Umeå across the Gulf of Bothnia to Vaasa
in Finland. There are several connections from the Stockholm area across the Sea
of Åland to Mariehamn in the Åland Islands as well as Turku and Helsinki on the
Finnish mainland and beyond to Estonia and St Petersburg in Russia. Ferry routes
from the Stockholm area also connect with Ventspils and Riga in Latvia as well
as Gdańsk in Poland across the Baltic Sea. The ferry ports of Karlskrona and
Karlshamn in southeastern Sweden serve Gdynia, Poland, and Klaipeda, Lithuania.
Ystad and Trelleborg near the southern tip of Sweden have ferry links with the
Danish island of Bornholm and the German ports of Sassnitz, Rostock and
Travemünde, respectively, and ferries run to Świnoujście, Poland, from both of
them. Trelleborg is the busiest ferry port in Sweden in terms of weight
transported by lorry. Its route to Sassnitz started as a steam-operated railway
ferry in the 19th century, and today's ferry still carries trains to Berlin
during the summer months. Another ferry route to Travemünde originates from
Malmö. Despite the opening of the fixed link to Denmark, the Øresund Bridge, the
busiest ferry route remains the short link across the narrowest section of the
Øresund between Helsingborg and the Danish port of Helsingør, known as the HH
Ferry route. There are over seventy departures a day each way; during peak
times, a ferry departs every fifteen minutes. Ports higher up the Swedish west
coast include Varberg, with a ferry connection across the Kattegat to Grenaa in
Denmark, and Göteborg, serving Frederikshavn at the northern tip of Denmark and
Kiel in Germany. Finally, there are ferries from Strömstad near the Norwegian
border to destinations around the Oslofjord in Norway. There used to be ferry
services to the United Kingdom from Göteborg to destinations such as Immingham,
Harwich and Newcastle, but these have been discontinued.

Sweden has two domestic ferry lines with large vessels, both connecting Gotland
with the mainland. The lines leave from Visby harbour on the island, and the
ferries sail to either Oskarshamn or Nynäshamn. A smaller car ferry connects the
island of Ven in Øresund with Landskrona.

Sweden has one of the most highly developed welfare states in the world.
According to a 2012 OECD report, the country had the second-highest public
social spending as a percentage of its GDP after France (27.3% and 28.4%,
respectively), and the third-highest total (public and private) social spending
at 30.2% of its GDP, after France and Belgium (31.3% and 31.0%, respectively).
Sweden spent 6.3% of its GDP, the 9th-highest among 34 OECD countries, to
provide equal access to education. On health care, the country spent 10.0% of
its total GDP, the 12th highest.

Historically, Sweden provided solid support for free trade (except agriculture)
and mostly relatively strong and stable property rights (both private and
public), though some economists have pointed out that Sweden promoted industries
with tariffs and used publicly subsidised R&D during the country's early
critical years of industrialisation. After World War II a succession of
governments expanded the welfare state by raising the taxes. During this period
Sweden's economic growth was also one of the highest in the industrial world. A
series of successive social reforms transformed the country into one of the most
equal and developed on earth. The consistent growth of the welfare state led to
Swedes achieving unprecedented levels of social mobility and quality of life—to
this day Sweden consistently ranks at the top of league tables for health,
literacy and Human Development—far ahead of some wealthier countries (for
example the United States).

However, from the 1970s and onwards Sweden's GDP growth fell behind other
industrialised countries and the country's per capita ranking fell from 4th to
14th place in a few decades. From the mid-1990s until today Sweden's economic
growth has once again accelerated and has been higher than in most other
industrialised countries (including the US) during the last 15 years. A report
from the United Nations Development Program predicted that Sweden's rating on
the Human Development Index will fall from 0.949 in 2010 to 0.906 in 2030.

Sweden began slowing the expansion of the welfare state in the 1980s, and even
trimming it back, and according to the OECD and McKinsey, Sweden has recently
been relatively quick to adopt economic liberalisation policies, such as
deregulation, compared to countries such as France. The current Swedish
government is continuing the trend of moderate rollbacks of previous social
reforms. Growth has been higher than in many other EU-15 countries. Also since
the mid-1980s, Sweden has had the fastest growth in inequality of any developed
nation, according to the OECD. This has largely been attributed to the reduction
in state benefits and a shift toward the privatisation of public services.
According to Barbro Sorman, an activist of the opposition Left Party, "The rich
are getting richer, and the poor are getting poorer. Sweden is starting to look
like the USA." Nevertheless, it remains far more egalitarian than most nations.
Partly as a result of these privatisations and widening economic disparity, the
Swedes in the 2014 elections put the Social Democrats back in power.

Sweden adopted free market agricultural policies in 1990. Since the 1930s, the
agricultural sector had been subject to price controls. In June 1990, the
Riksdag voted for a new agricultural policy marking a significant shift away
from price controls. As a result, food prices fell somewhat. However, the
liberalisations soon became moot because EU agricultural controls supervened.

Since the late 1960s, Sweden has had the highest tax quota (as percentage of
GDP) in the industrialised world, although today the gap has narrowed and
Denmark has surpassed Sweden as the most heavily taxed country among developed
countries. Sweden has a two-step progressive tax scale with a municipal income
tax of about 30% and an additional high-income state tax of 20–25% when a salary
exceeds roughly 320,000 SEK per year. Payroll taxes amount to 32%. In addition,
a national VAT of 25% is added to many things bought by private citizens, with
the exception of food (12% VAT), transportation, and books (6% VAT). Certain
items are subject to additional taxes, e.g. electricity, petrol/diesel and
alcoholic beverages.

In 2007[update], total tax revenue was 47.8% of GDP, the second-highest tax
burden among developed countries, down from 49.1% 2006. Sweden's inverted tax
wedge – the amount going to the service worker's wallet – is approximately 15%,
compared to 10% in Belgium, 30% in Ireland, and 50% in United States. Public
sector spending amounts to 53% of the GDP. State and municipal employees total
around a third of the workforce, much more than in most Western countries. Only
Denmark has a larger public sector (38% of Danish workforce). Spending on
transfers is also high.

In 2015 and 2016 69 per cent of the employed workers is organised in trade
unions. Union density in 2016 was 62% among blue-collar-workers (most of them in
the Swedish Trade Union Confederation, LO) and 75% among white-collar workers
(most of them in the Swedish Confederation of Professional Employees, TCO, and
the Swedish Confederation of Professional Associations, SACO). Sweden has
state-supported union unemployment funds (Ghent system). Trade unions have the
right to elect two representatives to the board in all Swedish companies with
more than 25 employees. Sweden has a relatively high amount of sick leave per
worker in OECD: the average worker loses 24 days due to sickness. In December
2008, the number employed in the 16–64 age group was 75.0%. The employment
tendency was very strong in 2007. The positive trend continued during the first
half of 2008, but the rate of increase slackened. According to Statistics
Sweden, the unemployment rate in June 2012 was at 8.8%. Unemployment among youth
(aged 24 or younger) in 2012 was 24.2%, making Sweden the OECD country with the
highest ratio of youth unemployment versus unemployment in general.

In the 18th century Sweden's scientific revolution took off. Previously,
technical progress had mainly come from mainland Europe.

In 1739, the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences was founded, with people such as
Carl Linnaeus and Anders Celsius as early members. Many of the companies founded
by early pioneers still remain major international brands. Gustaf Dalén founded
AGA, and received the Nobel Prize for his sun valve. Alfred Nobel invented
dynamite and instituted the Nobel Prizes. Lars Magnus Ericsson started the
company bearing his name, Ericsson, still one of the largest telecom companies
in the world. Jonas Wenström was an early pioneer in alternating current and is
along with Serbian inventor Nikola Tesla credited as one of the inventors of the
three-phase electrical system.

The traditional engineering industry is still a major source of Swedish
inventions, but pharmaceuticals, electronics and other high-tech industries are
gaining ground. Tetra Pak was an invention for storing liquid foods, invented by
Erik Wallenberg. Losec, an ulcer medicine, was the world's best-selling drug in
the 1990s and was developed by AstraZeneca. More recently Håkan Lans invented
the Automatic Identification System, a worldwide standard for shipping and civil
aviation navigation. A large portion of the Swedish economy is to this day based
on the export of technical inventions, and many large multinational corporations
from Sweden have their origins in the ingenuity of Swedish inventors.

Swedish inventors held 47,112 patents in the United States in 2014[update],
according to the United States Patent and Trademark Office. As a nation, only
ten other countries hold more patents than Sweden.

Combined, the public and the private sector in Sweden allocate over 3.5% of GDP
to research & development (R&D) per year, making Sweden's investment in R&D as a
percentage of GDP the second-highest in the world. For several decades the
Swedish government has prioritised scientific and R&D activities. As a
percentage of GDP, the Swedish government spends the most of any nation on
research and development. Sweden tops other European countries in the number of
published scientific works per capita.

In 2009, the decisions to construct Sweden's two largest scientific
installations, the synchrotron radiation facility MAX IV and the European
Spallation Source, were taken. Both installations will be built in Lund. The
European Spallation Source, costing some SEK 14 billion to construct, will be
operational in 2019 and will give an approximately 30 times stronger neutron
beam than any of today's existing neutron source installations. The MAX IV,
costing some SEK 3 billion, will be operational in 2015. Both facilities have
strong implications on material research.

The total population of Sweden was estimated to be 10,004,076 on 27 January
2017. The population exceeded 9 million for the first time on approximately 12
August 2004 and 9.5 million in the spring of 2012, according to Statistics
Sweden. The population density is 20.6 people per km² (53.3 per square mile) and
it is substantially higher in the south than in the north. About 85% of the
population live in urban areas. The capital city Stockholm has a municipality
population of about 900,000 (with 1.3 million in the urban area and 2 million in
the metropolitan area). The second- and third-largest cities are Gothenburg and
Malmö. Greater Gothenburg counts close to a million inhabitants and the same
goes for the Western part of Scania, around the Øresund. Together with Greater
Copenhagen, the entire population around the Öresund counts close to 3 million
at a land area of less than 6,000 square kilometres (2,300 sq mi). Another area
with notably higher population density compared to the general Swedish, is the
agricultural part of Östergötland. Also the western coast is fairly well
populated even outside Scania and Greater Gothenburg. So is also the area around
Lake Mälaren even outside Greater Stockholm and the agricultural area around
Uppsala.

While Norrland (which cover approximately 60% of the Swedish territory) has a
very low population density (below 5 people per square kilometre). The mountains
and most of the coast remotely areas are next to unpopulated. Low population
density exists also in large parts of western Svealand, as well as southern and
central Småland. An area known as Finnveden, which is located in the south-west
of Småland, and mainly below the 57th latitude, can also be considered as next
to empty of people.

Between 1820 and 1930, approximately 1.3 million Swedes, a third of the
country's population, emigrated to North America, and most of them to the United
States. There are more than 4.4 million Swedish Americans according to a 2006 US
Census Bureau estimate. In Canada, the community of Swedish ancestry is 330,000
strong.

There are no official statistics on ethnicity, but according to Statistics
Sweden around 1,921,000 (20.1%) inhabitants of Sweden were of a foreign
background in 2012, defined as being born abroad or born in Sweden to two
parents born abroad. With the same definition, the most common countries of
origin were Finland (2.38%), former Yugoslavia or its successing states (2.06%),
Iraq (1.74%), Poland (0.91%) and Iran (0.84%).

The official language of Sweden is Swedish, a North Germanic language, related
and very similar to Danish and Norwegian, but differing in pronunciation and
orthography. Norwegians have little difficulty understanding Swedish, and Danes
can also understand it, with slightly more difficulty than the Norwegians. The
same goes for standard Swedish speakers, who find it far easier to understand
Norwegian than Danish. The dialects spoken in Scania, the southernmost part of
the country, are influenced by Danish because the region traditionally was a
part of Denmark and is nowadays situated closely to it. Sweden Finns are
Sweden's largest linguistic minority, comprising about 5% of Sweden's
population, and Finnish is recognised as a minority language. With a large
influx of native speakers of Arabic in latter years, the prevalence of native
Arab speakers is likely more widespread than actual usage of Finnish. The actual
number is unknown, since no official statistics are kept.

Along with Finnish, four other minority languages are also recognised:
Meänkieli, Sami, Romani, and Yiddish. Swedish became Sweden's official language
on 1 July 2009, when a new language law was implemented. The issue of whether
Swedish should be declared the official language has been raised in the past,
and the Riksdag voted on the matter in 2005, but the proposal narrowly failed.

In varying degrees, depending largely on frequency of interaction with English,
a majority of Swedes, especially those born after World War II, understand and
speak English, owing to trade links, the popularity of overseas travel, a strong
Anglo-American influence and the tradition of subtitling rather than dubbing
foreign television shows and films, and the relative similarity of the two
languages which makes learning English easier. In a 2005 survey by
Eurobarometer, 89% of Swedes reported the ability to speak English.

English became a compulsory subject for secondary school students studying
natural sciences as early as 1849, and has been a compulsory subject for all
Swedish students since the late 1940s. Depending on the local school
authorities, English is currently a compulsory subject between first grade and
ninth grade, with all students continuing in secondary school studying English
for at least another year. Most students also study one and sometimes two
additional languages. These include (but are not limited to) German, French and
Spanish. Some Danish and Norwegian is at times also taught as part of Swedish
courses for native speakers. Because of the extensive mutual intelligibility
between the three continental Scandinavian languages Swedish speakers often use
their native language when visiting or living in Norway or Denmark.

Before the 11th century, Swedes adhered to Norse paganism, worshiping Æsir gods,
with its centre at the Temple in Uppsala. With Christianisation in the 11th
century, the laws of the country changed, forbidding worship of other deities
into the late 19th century. After the Protestant Reformation in the 1530s, a
change led by Martin Luther's Swedish associate Olaus Petri, the authority of
the Roman Catholic Church was abolished and Lutheranism became widespread.
Adoption of Lutheranism was completed by the Uppsala Synod of 1593, and it
became the official religion. During the era following the Reformation, usually
known as the period of Lutheran orthodoxy, small groups of non-Lutherans,
especially Calvinist Dutchmen, the Moravian Church and French Huguenots played a
significant role in trade and industry, and were quietly tolerated as long as
they kept a low religious profile.[citation needed] The Sami originally had
their own shamanistic religion, but they converted to Lutheranism by Swedish
missionaries in the 17th and 18th centuries.

With religious liberalisations in the late 18th century believers of other
faiths, including Judaism and Roman Catholicism, were allowed to live and work
freely in the country. However, until 1860 it remained illegal for Lutherans to
convert to another religion. The 19th century saw the arrival of various
evangelical free churches, and, towards the end of the century, secularism,
leading many to distance themselves from church rituals. Leaving the Church of
Sweden became legal with the so-called dissenter law of 1860, but only under the
provision of entering another Christian denomination. The right to stand outside
any religious denomination was formally established in the Law on Freedom of
religion in 1951.

In 2000, the Church of Sweden was disestablished. Sweden was the second Nordic
country to disestablish its state church (after Finland did so in the Church Act
of 1869).

At the end of 2014, 64.6% of Swedes belonged to the Church of Sweden; this
number has been decreasing by about one percentage point a year for the last two
decades. Approximately 2% of the church's members regularly attend Sunday
services. The reason for the large number of inactive members is partly that,
until 1996, children automatically became members at birth if at least one of
the parents was a member. Since 1996, only children that are christened become
members. Some 275,000 Swedes are today members of various Evangelical Protestant
free churches (where congregation attendance is much higher), and immigration
caused that there are now some 92,000 Roman Catholics and 100,000 Eastern
Orthodox Christians living in Sweden.

The first Muslim congregation was established in 1949, when a small contingent
of Tatars migrated from Finland. Islam's presence in Sweden remained marginal
until the 1960s, when Sweden started to receive migrants from the Balkans and
Turkey. Further immigration from North Africa and the Middle East have brought
the estimated Muslim population to 400,000. However, only about 110,000 are
members of a congregation and of these approximately 25,000 actively practise
Islam in the sense that they pray five times a day and attend Friday prayer.

Sociology professor Phil Zuckerman claims that Swedes, despite a lack of belief
in God, commonly question the term atheist, preferring to call themselves
Christians while being content with remaining in the Church of Sweden. Other
research has shown that religion in Sweden continues to play a role in cultural
identity. This is evidenced by the fact that around 70% of adults continue to
remain members of the Swedish Church despite having to pay a church tax;
moreover, rates of baptism remain high and church weddings are increasing.

Healthcare in Sweden is similar in quality to other developed nations. Sweden
ranks in the top five countries with respect to low infant mortality. It also
ranks high in life expectancy and in safe drinking water. A person seeking care
first contacts a clinic for a doctor's appointment, and may then be referred to
a specialist by the clinic physician, who may in turn recommend either
in-patient or out-patient treatment, or an elective care option. The health care
is governed by the 21 landsting of Sweden and is mainly funded by taxes, with
nominal fees for patients.

Children aged 1–5 years old are guaranteed a place in a public kindergarten
(Swedish: förskola or, colloquially, dagis). Between the ages of 6 and 16,
children attend compulsory comprehensive school. In the Programme for
International Student Assessment (PISA), Swedish 15-year-old pupils score close
to the OECD average. After completing the 9th grade, about 90% of the students
continue with a three-year upper secondary school (gymnasium), which can lead to
both a job qualification or entrance eligibility to university. The school
system is largely financed by taxes.

The Swedish government treats public and independent schools equally by
introducing education vouchers in 1992 as one of the first countries in the
world after the Netherlands. Anyone can establish a for-profit school and the
municipality must pay new schools the same amount as municipal schools get.
School lunch is free for all students in Sweden, and providing breakfast is also
encouraged.

There are a number of different universities and colleges in Sweden, the oldest
and largest of which are situated in Uppsala, Lund, Gothenburg and Stockholm. In
2000, 32% of Swedish people held a tertiary degree, making the country 5th in
the OECD in that category. Along with several other European countries, the
government also subsidises tuition of international students pursuing a degree
at Swedish institutions, although a recent bill passed in the Riksdag will limit
this subsidy to students from EEA countries and Switzerland.

Immigration has been a major source of population growth and cultural change
throughout much of the history of Sweden, and in recent centuries the country
has been transformed from a nation of net emigration, ending after World War I,
to a nation of net immigration, from World War II onwards. The economic, social,
and political aspects of immigration have caused controversy regarding
ethnicity, economic benefits, jobs for non-immigrants, settlement patterns,
impact on upward social mobility, crime, and voting behaviour.

There are no exact numbers on the ethnic background of migrants and their
descendants in Sweden because the Swedish government does not base any
statistics on ethnicity. This is, however, not to be confused with the migrants'
national backgrounds, which are recorded.

In 1998, there were 1,746,921 inhabitants of a foreign background (foreign-born
and children of international migrants), comprising around 20% of the Swedish
population. Around 1,216,659, or 70%, came from Scandinavia and the rest of
Europe and 530,262, or 30%, came from the rest of the world.

Around 27% or 2,000,000 inhabitants of Sweden had a full or partial foreign
background in 2011. Of these inhabitants, 1,427,296 persons living in Sweden
were born abroad. In addition, 430,253 persons were born in Sweden to two
parents born abroad and another 666,723 persons had one parent born abroad (with
the other parent born in Sweden). Thus, with the total population in 2011 being
9,482,855, roughly 15% of the population was born abroad, 4.5% of the population
was born in Sweden to two parents born abroad, and another 7% was born in Sweden
to one parent born abroad. Around 26.5% of the Swedish population is, at least
partly, of foreign descent.

According to Eurostat, in 2010, there were 1.33 million foreign-born residents
in Sweden, corresponding to 14.3% of the total population. Of these, 859 000
(9.2%) were born outside the EU and 477 000 (5.1%) were born in another EU
Member State.

In 2009, immigration reached its highest level since records began, with 102,280
people emigrating to Sweden. Immigrants in Sweden are mostly concentrated in the
urban areas of Svealand and Götaland. Since the early 1970s, immigration to
Sweden has been mostly due to refugee migration and family reunification from
countries in the Middle East and Latin America. In 2013, Sweden granted 29,000
people asylum, an increase of 67% compared to 2012.

The ten largest groups of foreign-born persons in the Swedish civil registry in
2012 were from:

Sweden has many authors of worldwide recognition including August Strindberg,
Astrid Lindgren, and Nobel Prize winners Selma Lagerlöf and Harry Martinson. In
total seven Nobel Prizes in Literature have been awarded to Swedes. The nation's
most well-known artists are painters such as Carl Larsson and Anders Zorn, and
the sculptors Tobias Sergel and Carl Milles.

Swedish 20th-century culture is noted by pioneering works in the early days of
cinema, with Mauritz Stiller and Victor Sjöström. In the 1920s–1980s, the
filmmaker Ingmar Bergman and actors Greta Garbo and Ingrid Bergman became
internationally noted people within cinema. More recently, the films of Lukas
Moodysson and Lasse Hallström have received international recognition.

Throughout the 1960s and 1970s Sweden was seen as an international leader in
what is now referred to as the "sexual revolution", with gender equality having
particularly been promoted. At the present time, the number of single people is
one of the highest in the world. The early Swedish film I Am Curious (Yellow)
(1967) reflected a liberal view of sexuality, including scenes of love making
that caught international attention, and introduced the concept of the "Swedish
sin" that had been introduced earlier in the US with Ingmar Bergman's Summer
with Monika.

The image of "hot love and cold people" emerged. Sexual liberalism was seen as
part of modernisation process that by breaking down traditional borders would
lead to the emancipation of natural forces and desires.

Sweden has also become very liberal towards homosexuality, as is reflected in
the popular acceptance of films such as Show Me Love, which is about two young
lesbians in the small Swedish town of Åmål. Since 1 May 2009, Sweden repealed
its "registered partnership" laws and fully replaced them with gender-neutral
marriage, Sweden also offers domestic partnerships for both same-sex and
opposite-sex couples. Cohabitation (sammanboende) by couples of all ages,
including teenagers as well as elderly couples, is widespread. Recently, Sweden
is experiencing a baby boom.

Sweden has a rich musical tradition, ranging from mediaeval folk ballads to hip
hop music. The music of the pre-Christian Norse has been lost to history,
although historical re-creations have been attempted based on instruments found
in Viking sites. The instruments used were the lur (a sort of trumpet), simple
string instruments, wooden flutes and drums. It is possible that the Viking
musical legacy lives on in some of the old Swedish folk music. Sweden has a
significant folk-music scene, both in the traditional style as well as more
modern interpretations which often mix in elements of rock and jazz. There is
also Sami music, called the joik, which is actually a type of chant which is
part of the traditional Saami animistic spirituality but has gained recognition
in the international world of folk music. Sweden's most classic and notable
composers includes Carl Michael Bellman and Franz Berwald.

Sweden also has a prominent choral music tradition, deriving in part from the
cultural importance of Swedish folk songs. In fact, out of a population of 9.5
million, it is estimated that five to six hundred thousand people sing in
choirs.

In 2007, with over 800 million dollars in revenue, Sweden was the third-largest
music exporter in the world and surpassed only by the US and the
UK.[better source needed] According to one source 2013, Sweden produces the most
chart hits per capita in the world, followed by the UK and the USA. ABBA was one
of the first internationally well known popular music bands from Sweden, and
still ranks among the most prominent bands in the world, with about 370 million
records sold. With ABBA, Sweden entered into a new era, in which Swedish pop
music gained international prominence.

There have been many other internationally successful bands since, such as
Roxette, Ace of Base, Europe, A-teens, The Cardigans, Robyn, The Hives and
Soundtrack of Our Lives, to name some of the biggest.

Sweden has also become known for a large number of heavy metal bands, including
Bathory, Opeth, Amon Amarth and Ghost. The renowned neo-classical power metal
guitarist Yngwie Malmsteen is also from Sweden.

Starting in the 1990s, Denniz Pop's Cheiron Studios became an international hit
factory, with his disciple Max Martin responsible for Britney Spears'
breakthrough songs and for shaping the whole boy-band boom at the turn of the
millennium with global hits for groups like the Backstreet Boys and 'N Sync. In
the mid-2000s, Martin came back with a more rock-tinged sound and produced major
hits with artists such as Kelly Clarkson, Pink and Katy Perry. Another producer
worth mentioning is RedOne, a Moroccan-Swede who is the creator of a slew of
hits for Lady Gaga.

Sweden is one of the most successful competing nations at the Eurovision Song
Contest, with a total of six victories in the contest (1974, 1984, 1991, 1999,
2012 and 2015), right behind Ireland who have seven wins. In Eurovision Song
Contest each participating country submits an original song to be performed on
live television and radio; however, no restriction on the nationality of the
songwriter and the artist exists which has resulted in countries being
represented by songwriters and artist who are not nationals of that country. In
recent years Swedish songwriters have been involved in the writing entirely or
partly of entries from several countries including Sweden. For instance, in the
2012 edition of Eurovision Song Contest, Swedish songwriters and producers
featured in 10 out of the 42 songs that qualified for the contest; in 2013, the
numbers were 7 songs out of the 39 songs in the contest; in 2014, 7 songs out of
37 songs in the contest; in 2015, 8 songs out of 40 songs in the contest; in
2016, 12 songs out of 42 songs in the contest.

Sweden has a rather lively jazz scene. During the last sixty years or so it has
attained a remarkably high artistic standard, stimulated by domestic as well as
external influences and experiences. The Centre for Swedish Folk Music and Jazz
Research has published an overview of jazz in Sweden by Lars Westin.

Before the 13th century almost all buildings were made of timber, but a shift
began towards stone. Early Swedish stone buildings are the Romanesque churches
on the country side. As so happens, many of them were built in Scania and are in
effect Danish churches. This would include the Lund Cathedral from the 11th
century and the somewhat younger church in Dalby, but also many early Gothic
churches built through influences of the Hanseatic League, such as in Ystad,
Malmö and Helsingborg.

Cathedrals in other parts of Sweden were also built as seats of Sweden's
bishops. The Skara Cathedral is of bricks from the 14th century, and the Uppsala
Cathedral in the 15th. In 1230 the foundations of the Linköping Cathedral were
made, the material was there limestone, but the building took some 250 years to
finish.

Among older structures are also some significant fortresses and other historical
buildings such as at Borgholm Castle, Halltorps Manor and Eketorp fortress on
the island Öland, the Nyköping fortress and the Visby city wall.

Around 1520 Sweden was out of the Middle Ages and united under King Gustav Vasa,
who immediately initiated grand mansions, castles and fortresses to be built.
Some of the more magnificent include the Kalmar fortress, the Gripsholm Castle
and the one at Vadstena.

In the next two centuries, Sweden was designated by Baroque architecture and
later the rococo. Notable projects from that time include the city Karlskrona,
which has now also been declared a World Heritage Site and the Drottningholm
Palace.

1930 was the year of the great Stockholm exhibition, which marked the
breakthrough of Functionalism, or "funkis" as it became known. The style came to
dominate in the following decades. Some notable projects of this kind were the
Million Programme, offering affordable living in large apartment complexes.

Swedes are among the greatest consumers of newspapers in the world, and nearly
every town is served by a local paper. The country's main quality morning papers
are Dagens Nyheter (liberal), Göteborgs-Posten (liberal), Svenska Dagbladet
(liberal conservative) and Sydsvenska Dagbladet (liberal). The two largest
evening tabloids are Aftonbladet (social democratic) and Expressen (liberal).
The ad-financed, free international morning paper, Metro International, was
founded in Stockholm, Sweden. The country's news is reported in English by,
among others, The Local (liberal).

The public broadcasting companies held a monopoly on radio and television for a
long time in Sweden. Licence funded radio broadcasts started in 1925. A second
radio network was started in 1954 and a third opened 1962 in response to pirate
radio stations. Non-profit community radio was allowed in 1979 and in 1993
commercial local radio started.

The licence-funded television service was officially launched in 1956. A second
channel, TV2, was launched in 1969. These two channels (operated by Sveriges
Television since the late 1970s) held a monopoly until the 1980s when cable and
satellite television became available. The first Swedish language satellite
service was TV3 which started broadcasting from London in 1987. It was followed
by Kanal 5 in 1989 (then known as Nordic Channel) and TV4 in 1990.

In 1991 the government announced it would begin taking applications from private
television companies wishing to broadcast on the terrestrial network. TV4, which
had previously been broadcasting via satellite, was granted a permit and began
its terrestrial broadcasts in 1992, becoming the first private channel to
broadcast television content from within the country.

Around half the population are connected to cable television. Digital
terrestrial television in Sweden started in 1999 and the last analogue
terrestrial broadcasts were terminated in 2007.

The first literary text from Sweden is the Rök Runestone, carved during the
Viking Age c. 800 AD. With the conversion of the land to Christianity around
1100 AD, Sweden entered the Middle Ages, during which monastic writers preferred
to use Latin. Therefore, there are only a few texts in the Old Swedish from that
period. Swedish literature only flourished when the Swedish language was
standardised in the 16th century, a standardisation largely due to the full
translation of the Bible into Swedish in 1541. This translation is the so-called
Gustav Vasa Bible.

With improved education and the freedom brought by secularisation, the 17th
century saw several notable authors develop the Swedish language further. Some
key figures include Georg Stiernhielm (17th century), who was the first to write
classical poetry in Swedish; Johan Henric Kellgren (18th century), the first to
write fluent Swedish prose; Carl Michael Bellman (late 18th century), the first
writer of burlesque ballads; and August Strindberg (late 19th century), a
socio-realistic writer and playwright who won worldwide fame. The early 20th
century continued to produce notable authors, such as Selma Lagerlöf, (Nobel
laureate 1909), Verner von Heidenstam (Nobel laureate 1916) and Pär Lagerkvist
(Nobel laureate 1951).

In recent decades, a handful of Swedish writers have established themselves
internationally, including the detective novelist Henning Mankell and the writer
of spy fiction Jan Guillou. The Swedish writer to have made the most lasting
impression on world literature is the children's book writer Astrid Lindgren,
and her books about Pippi Longstocking, Emil, and others. In 2008, the second
best-selling fiction author in the world was Stieg Larsson, whose Millennium
series of crime novels is being published posthumously to critical acclaim.
Larsson drew heavily on the work of Lindgren by basing his central character,
Lisbeth Salander, on Longstocking.

Apart from traditional Protestant Christian holidays, Sweden also celebrates
some unique holidays, some of a pre-Christian tradition. They include Midsummer
celebrating the summer solstice; Walpurgis Night (Valborgsmässoafton) on 30
April lighting bonfires; and Labour Day or Mayday on 1 May is dedicated to
socialist demonstrations. The day of giver-of-light Saint Lucia, 13 December, is
widely acknowledged in elaborate celebrations which betoken its Italian origin
and commence the month-long Christmas season.

6 June is the National Day of Sweden and has since 2005 been a public holiday.
Furthermore, there are official flag day observances and a Namesdays in Sweden
calendar. In August many Swedes have kräftskivor (crayfish dinner parties).
Martin of Tours Eve is celebrated in Scania in November with Mårten Gås parties,
where roast goose and svartsoppa ('black soup', made of goose stock, fruit,
spices, spirits and goose blood) are served. The Sami, one of Sweden's
indigenous minorities, have their holiday on 6 February and Scania celebrate
their Scanian Flag day on the third Sunday in July.

Swedish cuisine, like that of the other Scandinavian countries (Denmark, Norway
and Finland), was traditionally simple. Fish (particularly herring), meat,
potatoes and dairy products played prominent roles. Spices were sparse. Famous
preparations include Swedish meatballs, traditionally served with gravy, boiled
potatoes and lingonberry jam; pancakes; lutfisk; and the smörgåsbord, or lavish
buffet. Akvavit is a popular alcoholic distilled beverage, and the drinking of
snaps is of cultural importance. The traditional flat and dry crisp bread has
developed into several contemporary variants. Regionally important foods are the
surströmming (a fermented fish) in northern Sweden and eel in Scania in southern
Sweden.

In August, at the traditional feast known as crayfish party, kräftskiva, Swedes
eat large amounts of crayfish boiled with dill.

Swedes have been fairly prominent in the film area through the years. A number
of Swedish people have found success in Hollywood, including Ingrid Bergman,
Greta Garbo and Max von Sydow. Amongst several directors who have made
internationally successful films can be mentioned Ingmar Bergman, Lukas
Moodysson and Lasse Hallström.

Interest in fashion is big in Sweden and the country is headquartering famous
brands like Hennes & Mauritz (operating as H&M), J. Lindeberg (operating as JL),
Acne, Lindex, Odd Molly, Cheap Monday, Gant, WESC, Filippa K, and Nakkna within
its borders. These companies, however, are composed largely of buyers who import
fashionable goods from throughout Europe and America, continuing the trend of
Swedish business toward multinational economic dependency like many of its
neighbours.

Sport activities are a national movement with half of the population actively
participating in organised sporting activities. The two main spectator sports
are football and ice hockey. Second to football, horse sports have the highest
number of practitioners who are mostly women. Thereafter, golf, track and field,
and the team sports of handball, floorball, basketball and bandy are the most
popular.

The Swedish national men's ice hockey team, affectionately known as Tre Kronor
(English: Three Crowns; the national symbol of Sweden), is regarded as one of
the best in the world. The team has won the World Championships nine times,
placing them third in the all-time medal count. Tre Kronor also won Olympic gold
medals in 1994 and 2006. In 2006, Tre Kronor became the first national hockey
team to win both the Olympic and world championships in the same year. The
Swedish national football team has seen some success at the World Cup in the
past, finishing second when they hosted the tournament in 1958, and third twice,
in 1950 and 1994. Athletics has enjoyed a surge in popularity due to several
successful athletes in recent years, such as Carolina Klüft and Stefan Holm.

Sweden hosted the 1912 Summer Olympics, Equestrian at the 1956 Summer Olympics
and the FIFA World Cup in 1958. Other big sports events include the UEFA Euro
1992, 1995 FIFA Women's World Cup, 1995 World Championships in Athletics, UEFA
Women's Euro 2013, and several championships of ice hockey, curling, athletics,
skiing, bandy, figure skating and swimming.

Successful football players include Gunnar Nordahl, Gunnar Gren, Nils Liedholm,
Henrik Larsson, Fredrik Ljungberg, Caroline Seger, Lotta Schelin, Hedvig
Lindahl, and Zlatan Ibrahimović. Successful tennis players include former world
number 1 players Björn Borg, Mats Wilander and Stefan Edberg. Other famous
Swedish athletes include the heavyweight boxing champion and International
Boxing Hall of Famer Ingemar Johansson, World Golf Hall of Famer Annika
Sörenstam, and multiple World Championships and Olympics medalist in table
tennis Jan-Ove Waldner. Due to its northerly latitude numerous world class
winter sports athletes have come from Sweden. This includes alpine skiers
Ingemar Stenmark, Anja Pärson and Pernilla Wiberg as well as cross
country-skiers Gunde Svan, Thomas Wassberg, Charlotte Kalla and Marcus Hellner,
all Olympic gold medalists.

In 2016 The Swedish Poker Federation (Svepof) has joined The International
Federation of Poker (IFP).



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mario_G%C3%B3mez

Mario Gómez García (German pronunciation: [ˈmaːʁi̯oː ˈɡɔmɛs]; born 10 July 1985)
is a German professional footballer who plays as a striker for German club VfL
Wolfsburg, and the German national team. Gómez joined Fiorentina after spending
four seasons with Bayern Munich, which he joined after six years playing for VfB
Stuttgart. At the time the fee was a record for a player transferred in the
Bundesliga, estimated to be €30–35 million. The fee is currently the third
highest, after former Bayern teammates Mario Götze and Javi Martínez,
respectively. When Stuttgart became champions in 2006–07, Gómez contributed 14
goals and seven assists at the age of 21 and was selected as German Footballer
of the Year.

With Bayern Munich, Gómez was the Bundesliga top scorer in 2011, and led Bayern
to the Champions League final, where they lost to Chelsea. That same year he
also led the German National Team to the European Cup semi-final, where they
lost to Italy. Despite being the second top goalscorer, behind Fernando Torres,
he was subsequently criticized for his style. Additionally, he was then dropped
from the German national team squad, not to feature with the team until 2016.

Gómez played for VfB Stuttgart II in the Regionalliga Süd in the 2003–04 and
2004–05 seasons. He scored six goals in 19 appearances during the 2003–04 season
and 15 goals in 24 appearances in the 2004–05 season.

On 9 March 2004, Gómez played 10 minutes for VfB Stuttgart in the Champions
League first knock-out round against Chelsea and made his debut in the
Bundesliga on 8 May, coming on for Imre Szabics in a 2–1 loss to Hamburger SV.
These ended up as his only two appearances for the first team during the 2003–04
season. He would go on to make eight league appearances, one German Cup
appearance, and one UEFA Cup appearance.

In the 2005–06 season, Gómez joined the first team permanently. He played 30
times in the Bundesliga, scoring six times at this level. His first goal came on
17 September 2005 as the striker scored the winning goal in a 2–1 defeat of 1.
FSV Mainz 05. The striker also played five times in the UEFA Cup, scoring twice,
and played three times in both the German Cup, and German League Cup.

In the 2006–07 season, the youngster established himself as one of the top
scorers in the Bundesliga. He broke his hand, however, on 10 March 2007 and
suffered a torn ligament in his left knee. He made his comeback on 12 May 2007
and immediately scored after coming on from the bench. In that game, Stuttgart
defeated VfL Bochum (3–2) and went two points clear heading into the
Bundesliga's final weekend, where they won at home against Energie Cottbus, thus
becoming German champions. Furthermore, Stuttgart also reached final of the
DFB-Pokal, where Gómez participated, but Stuttgart lost to 1. FC Nürnberg. He
finished the season with 14 goals in 25 league appearances and two goals in five
German Cup appearances. After the season, he was named German Footballer of the
Year for 2007 and extended his contract at Stuttgart until 2012.

In the 2007–08 season, while the rest of his team struggled to keep performing
at their 2006–07 season standards, Gómez remained at an astonishingly high
level, scoring 19 goals in 25 appearances, second in the Bundesliga's Top Scorer
list, just behind Bayern Munich's Luca Toni, who scored 24 times. In the
DFB-Pokal, Gómez was the top scorer, with six goals. Because of his development,
many big clubs became interested in the then-23-year-old forward. Gómez gained
the nickname "Mr. Zuverlässig" ("Mr. Reliable"), as seen in his second of three
goals against Bundesliga rival Werder Bremen (final score 6–3), where he managed
to net in a virtually unreachable pass by teammate Yıldıray Baştürk. On 9 May
2009, Gómez hit four goals to inspire Stuttgart to a 4–1 victory over Bundesliga
champions VfL Wolfsburg. He also had six goals in three German Cup appearances
and three goals in four Champions League appearances.

The 2008–09 season proved to be his last in a Stuttgart uniform. He would
transfer to Bayern Munich after the season. During the season, he would score 24
goals in 32 league appearances, three goals in two German Cup appearances, eight
goals in 10 UEFA Cup appearances. to bring his totals to 35 goals from 44
appearances in all competitions.

On 26 May 2009, Gómez was eventually transferred to Bayern Munich on a
Bundesliga record transfer fee, signing a four-year contract. The amount of the
transfer fee varies from 30–35 million euro, depending on different sources.
Gómez was not scoring like his usual self in his first season for Bayern, with
just 10 league goals and one Champions League goal netted, but in the cup, he
was more prolific, with three goals in just four games. Gómez was also short in
the assists column, as well. Quite surprisingly, he made an impact as he was to
start the majority of games next season for Bayern. Also in his first season,
Gómez was teamed up with his German international strike partner Miroslav Klose
to give him some first-team experience.

After an erratic first season at Bayern with 10 goals in 29 league appearances,
Gómez established himself as a starter during the 2010–11 season (to an extent
at the expense of Miroslav Klose and due to an injury sustained by Ivica Olić)
and finished as top goalscorer in the Bundesliga with 28 goals. He scored his
100th Bundesliga goal with his third strike in a 1–8 away victory over FC St.
Pauli on 7 May 2011, the hat-trick already being his fifth in the Bundesliga in
the 2010–11 season, and his sixth overall, adding in his hat-trick against CFR
Cluj in the Champions League. Gómez has scored 13 hat-tricks in his Bundesliga
career, three with VfB Stuttgart and ten with Bayern. Gómez also netted eight
times in the Champions League and finished in second place in the season's top
scorers, tied with Samuel Eto'o, although Bayern were eliminated in the Round of
16 by Internazionale. Gómez in all competitions scored 39 goals in his second
season with the Bavarian club.

Gómez started the 2011–12 season in similar style towards the previous season
and he opened his league account on 20 August 2011 in Bayern's thrashing of
Hamburger SV. Seven days later, Gómez scored a hat-trick away to 1. FC
Kaiserslautern. On 10 September, Gómez then netted four goals in Bayern's 7–0
rout of SC Freiburg, sealing four straight wins for the Bavarians and a return
to the top of the Bundesliga table. On 27 September, the striker netted two
first half goals as Bayern defeated Manchester City 2–0 in the Group Stages of
the Champions League, a game infamously remembered for which City striker Carlos
Tevez reportedly refused to play.

Gómez scored his second brace of the Bundesliga campaign against Hertha BSC when
Bayern won 4–0. Gómez then recorded another brace on 29 October when Bayern then
defeated 1. FC Nürnberg 4–0. Then, on 11 December 2011, he scored his third
brace of the season and sealed Bayern's 2–1 win over southern rivals VfB
Stuttgart, his former club. On 2 November 2011, he netted a hat-trick in a
Champions League Group Stage game against Italian Serie A club Napoli. Bayern
went on to win 3–2. In the DFB-Pokal, Gómez scored just two goals. On 16
December 2011, Gómez scored his 50th goal for the calendar year of 2011 against
1. FC Köln.

On 13 March 2012, the second leg of their Champions League tie against FC Basel,
the Munich club overturned their 0–1 away loss as Gómez netted four of Bayern's
seven goals, firing the Bavarians through to the quarter-finals 7–1 on
aggregate. In the quarter-finals, Bayern faced French Ligue 1 side Olympique de
Marseille and in the first leg on 28 March, Gómez fired in his 11th Champions
League goal of the campaign in a 2–0 win for the Bavarians.

On 4 April, Gómez signed a new contract with Bayern Munich, keeping him at the
club until the summer of 2016. Gómez scored the winning goal in Bayern's 2–1
victory over Real Madrid in the first leg of their semi-final clash; Bayern went
on to win the tie 3–1 on penalties after the teams were deadlocked 3–3 on
aggregate. On 19 May 2012, he played in the Champions League Final against
Chelsea. He failed to find the net in regular time in the game but scored in the
penalty shoot-out as Bayern once again fell at the final hurdle, losing 4–3 on
penalties after a 1–1 finish. He finished the 2011–12 season with 26 goals in 33
league appearances, two goals in five German Cup appearances, and 13 goals in 14
Champions League appearances.

Gómez came back late to the squad, after having ankle surgery post UEFA Euro
2012. Because of his injury and the stellar performance of Croatian striker
Mario Mandžukić at the European Championships, the Croatian was signed from VfL
Wolfsburg. The signing relegated Gómez to the bench and Mandžukić hit a run of
form that made him the Bundesliga's top scorer.

Gómez returned to action on 20 November 2012 in the club's 1–1 draw with
Valencia CF in the Group Stage of the Champions League, coming on as a 79th
minute sub for winger Franck Ribéry. The striker scored his first goal within a
minute of his Bundesliga season debut, slotting home after good work from Toni
Kroos, capping off a 5–0 victory over Hannover 96 on 24 November. On 5 December,
Gómez opened the scoring for the hosts in their final group game of the
Champions League, a 4–1 defeat of BATE Borisov which secured the Bavarians top
spot in the group over Valencia.

Following the winter break, Gómez pushed for a first-team berth, scoring two
goals and setting up another as Bayern cruised past Werder Bremen 6–1 on 23
February 2013. The game was coincidentally his manager Jupp Heynckes' 1,000th
game as a player and coach in the Bundesliga. The striker was a used substitute
against Eintracht Frankfurt on 6 April, as a lone Bastian Schweinsteiger strike
confirmed an 11th successive victory and a 23rd national title for the club,
Gómez's second with Bayern and third overall.

On 16 April, in the DFB-Pokal semi-final against VfL Wolfsburg, Gómez scored a
six-minute hat-trick after being subbed on in the 77th minute, rounding off a
comfortable 6–1 victory and securing a spot in the final against southern rivals
and former club Stuttgart. In the club's next league match, on 20 April, Bayern
managed another 6–1 victory and Gómez recorded a second brace in four days to
lift Bayern to a 26th league victory of the campaign, a new Bundesliga record.
Gómez led the line in the absence of Mario Mandžukić to good effect, poking home
Bayern's second goal in their 4–0 first-leg demolition of FC Barcelona in the
semi-finals of the Champions League on 23 April.

Despite missing the better half of the first three months of the campaign, Gómez
still managed 11 Bundesliga strikes, placing him as third top-scorer in the
league for the club. He made an appearance as a late substitute in Bayern's 2–1
Champions League Final victory over German rivals Borussia Dortmund on 25 May at
Wembley Stadium in London. He netted a second-half brace in the DFB-Pokal Final
on 1 June as Bayern defeated Gómez's former club Stuttgart 3–2 at the
Olympiastadion in Berlin. The win secured a 16th DFB-Pokal trophy and an
unprecedented league, cup, and European cup treble for the Bavarians. He
finished the 2012–13 season with 11 goals in 21 league appearances,

On 6 June 2013, Gómez' consultant Uli Ferber announced that it "is quite clear
that he will separate from Bayern" as he had fallen behind Mario Mandžukić in
the pecking order for starting striker.

On 8 July 2013, Gómez joined Serie A side Fiorentina by signing a four-year
deal, for a fee believed to be around €20 million. He was officially unveiled as
a Fiorentina player on 15 July, to a crowd of 20,000 people.

Gómez scored his first two goals for la Viola in a 5–2 defeat of Genoa on 1
September. In the following match, a 1–1 draw with Cagliari, Gómez sustained an
injury which kept him out of the team until Fiorentina's match against
Internazionale on 15 February 2014.

On 13 March, he scored his first European goal for Fiorentina in a 1–1 draw
against Juventus in the first leg of a UEFA Europa League round-of-16 tie. Three
days later, he scored his first goal at the Stadio Artemio Franchi in a 3–1 win
against Chievo Verona.

On 23 March, he damaged the ligaments in his left knee in a 1–0 win at S.S.C.
Napoli and was later ruled out for the remainder of the season by Fiorentina
manager Vincenzo Montella. During the 2013–14 season, he scored three goals in
nine league appearances and a goal in six Europa League appearances.

Gómez scored twice in Fiorentina's 3–1 win over Atalanta in the last 16 of the
Coppa Italia on 21 January 2015, and followed this up with another brace 13 days
later in a 2–0 quarter-final win away to Roma. He finished 2014–15 season with
four goals in 20 league appearances, four goals in four Coppa Italia, and two
goals in eight Europa League appearances.

On 30 July 2015, Gómez agreed to a loan to Turkish club Beşiktaş on a
season-long deal, with an option to buy. He made his debut on 16 August in the
first game of the season, replacing man of the match Oguzhan Ozyakup for the
final 17 minutes of a 5–2 win at Mersin İdmanyurdu; he and fellow new signing
Ricardo Quaresma were not match-fit. His first goals came on 13 September,
netting both of a 2–0 victory against İstanbul Başakşehir F.K. at the Atatürk
Olympic Stadium; two weeks later he added two more in a 3–2 win over another
Istanbul rival, Fenerbahçe S.K. Gómez finished his first season with Beşiktaş as
the Gol Kralı, the league's top scorer, as the club secured their first league
title in seven years. The last of his 26 goals came in a 3–1 home win over
Osmanlıspor that sealed the title with a game remaining.

On 20 July 2016 Gómez announced via his Facebook and Twitter accounts that he
would not be making his stay with Beşiktaş a permanent one. He cited the tense
political climate in Turkey as the overriding factor in his decision to leave
the club after the country was rocked by a failed coup d'état in which more than
300 people were killed.

On 17 August 2016, Gómez signed for German club Wolfsburg. He scored his first
goal for the club on 22 October, netting in a 3–1 defeat to Darmstadt. His goal
was the 1000th scored by Wolfsburg in the Bundesliga.

Gómez has both German and Spanish citizenship, but played for all German youth
national teams from age 14. He made his debut for the German national team
against Switzerland on 7 February 2007 in Düsseldorf. Germany won the match 3–1,
with Gómez scoring Germany's second goal. Gómez gained his second cap for
Germany, coming on as a substitute for Kevin Kurányi in a Euro 2008 qualifier
against San Marino, scoring two goals that contributed to a final 6–0 victory.

After Gómez impressed in pre-tournament friendlies, Joachim Löw called him up to
the German squad for Euro 2008. Löw broke up the strike partnership of Lukas
Podolski and Miroslav Klose, with Podolski moving out to the left wing at the
expense of talismanic midfielder Bastian Schweinsteiger and Gómez partnering
Klose up front. Unfortunately, he was not able to reproduce his club form and
missed several clear-cut chances, including a crucial one in the last group
match against Austria, a performance for which he was criticized by the German
media and many fans of die Nationalmannschaft. Germany eventually won courtesy
of a Michael Ballack free-kick to seal a place in the knock-out stages but Löw
dropped Gómez to the bench and reverted to the Podolski–Klose partnership. He
was an unused substitute in the quarter-final and semi-final and later came off
the bench in the final of Euro 2008 for Miroslav Klose but could not prevent
Germany from losing 1–0 to Spain on 29 June.

In a friendly match against the United Arab Emirates played on 2 June 2009,
Gómez netted four goals, ending his 15-game goal drought for the national team,
in Germany's 7–2 victory.

Gómez was named as one of the six forwards in Joachim Löw's 23-man squad for the
2010 World Cup in South Africa. He featured in four out of seven German matches
at the World Cup, all from the substitutes bench, against Australia, replacing
Mesut Özil in the 73rd minute; Serbia, coming on for left back Holger Badstuber
in the 77th minute; England, coming on for fellow forward Miroslav Klose in the
72nd minute; and Spain, replacing defensive midfielder Sami Khedira on 80
minutes. Again he did not score a goal at a major tournament.

Although being the second choice behind Miroslav Klose as centre-forward during
Germany's qualification for Euro 2012, Gómez played regularly and contributed
goals against every opponent of that campaign: Kazakhstan, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Turkey, and Belgium. This included two goals against Austria in Germany's 2–1
away win in the Ernst-Happel-Stadion, netting into the very same goal in which
he had been unable to score three years earlier during Euro 2008. In a
spontaneous gesture of relief, he kissed the goalpost after he scored the first
goal.

Prior to Euro 2012, Gómez captained Germany for the first time in a 3–3 draw
against Ukraine in the first match at the renovated Olympic Stadion of Kiev. It
was his 50th international cap, and aged 26, he was Germany's oldest player in
the starting lineup.

Gómez scored the only, and winning, goal against Portugal in their first group
match at Euro 2012. He then scored twice against the Netherlands in Germany's
second Group B match, making it three goals in two games. In the end, he became
second-best scorer of the tournament, behind Spain's Fernando Torres. Both had
three goals and one assist; Torres, however, became top scorer of the tournament
because of having played fewer minutes than Gómez.

After missing the majority of the 2013–14 season with a knee injury, Gómez was
not included in Joachim Löw's squad for the 2014 FIFA World Cup.

Gómez was recalled to the Germany squad for friendlies against France and the
Netherlands in November 2015. He scored his first international goal in four
years in a 2–3 loss to England in Berlin on 26 March 2016.

On 21 June 2016, Gómez was selected to start in Germany's final UEFA Euro 2016
group match against Northern Ireland, scoring the winning goal in the 30th
minute.

On 26 June 2016, Gómez scored in the 43th minute in Germany's Round of 16 3–0
win against Slovakia, becoming Germany's all-time leading scorer at the European
Championship with 5 goals.

Gómez can shoot with both feet, and is considered to be an aerial threat. His
best ability, however, remains his ability to anticipate crosses and passes, and
position himself to shoot. Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger described him as "a
great finisher who is often in the right place to finish off moves." Moreover,
his body balance and ability to hold up the ball often creates trouble for
defenders. During his time at Bayern, his ability to appear "at the right place
at the right time" proved to be one of Bayern's most lethal attacking weapons as
Franck Ribéry and Arjen Robben could often outrun defenders and provide a cross
for Gómez. However, despite his goal-scoring abilities, Gómez is often accused
of having limited skills and a poor work-ethic.

Gómez was born in Riedlingen. He was brought up in nearby Unlingen, an Upper
Swabian village in the state of Baden-Württemberg in southwestern Germany about
100 km south of Stuttgart and 175 km west of Munich. Gómez is of German-Spanish
descent — his father, José "Pepe" Gómez García, is Spanish from Albuñán, Granada
and his mother, Christel Roth, is German. He has dual citizenship and opted to
play for the German national team.

Gómez ended his nine-year relationship with Silvia Meichel on 2 October 2012.
Gómez has been dating German model Carina Wanzung since December 2012. They
married on 22 July 2016.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A._P._J._Abdul_Kalam

Avul Pakir Jainulabdeen Abdul Kalam better known as A.P.J. Abdul Kalam i/ˈæbdʊl
kəˈlɑːm/; (15 October 1931 – 27 July 2015) was the 11th President of India from
2002 to 2007. A career scientist turned statesman, Kalam was born and raised in
Rameswaram, Tamil Nadu, and studied physics and aerospace engineering. He spent
the next four decades as a scientist and science administrator, mainly at the
Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) and Indian Space Research
Organisation (ISRO) and was intimately involved in India's civilian space
programme and military missile development efforts. He thus came to be known as
the Missile Man of India for his work on the development of ballistic missile
and launch vehicle technology. He also played a pivotal organisational,
technical, and political role in India's Pokhran-II nuclear tests in 1998, the
first since the original nuclear test by India in 1974.

Kalam was elected as the 11th President of India in 2002 with the support of
both the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party and the then-opposition Indian National
Congress. Widely referred to as the "People's President," he returned to his
civilian life of education, writing and public service after a single term. He
was a recipient of several prestigious awards, including the Bharat Ratna,
India's highest civilian honour.

While delivering a lecture at the Indian Institute of Management Shillong, Kalam
collapsed and died from an apparent cardiac arrest on 27 July 2015, aged 83.
Thousands including national-level dignitaries attended the funeral ceremony
held in his hometown of Rameshwaram, where he was buried with full state
honours.

Avul Pakir Jainulabdeen Abdul Kalam was born on 15 October 1931 to a Tamil
Muslim family in the pilgrimage centre of Rameswaram on Pamban Island, then in
the Madras Presidency and now in the State of Tamil Nadu. His father
Jainulabudeen was a boat owner and imam of a local mosque; his mother Ashiamma
was a housewife. His father owned a ferry that took Hindu pilgrims back and
forth between Rameswaram and the now uninhabited Dhanushkodi. Kalam was the
youngest of four brothers and one sister in his family. His ancestors had been
wealthy traders and landowners, with numerous properties and large tracts of
land. Their business had involved trading groceries between the mainland and the
island and to and from Sri Lanka, as well as ferrying pilgrims between the
mainland and Pamban. As a result, the family acquired the title of "Mara Kalam
iyakkivar" (wooden boat steerers), which over the years became shortened to
"Marakier." With the opening of the Pamban Bridge to the mainland in 1914,
however, the businesses failed and the family fortune and properties were lost
over time, apart from the ancestral home. By his early childhood, Kalam's family
had become poor; at an early age, he sold newspapers to supplement his family's
income.

In his school years, Kalam had average grades but was described as a bright and
hardworking student who had a strong desire to learn. He spent hours on his
studies, especially mathematics. After completing his education at the Schwartz
Higher Secondary School, Ramanathapuram, Kalam went on to attend Saint Joseph's
College, Tiruchirappalli, then affiliated with the University of Madras, from
where he graduated in physics in 1954. He moved to Madras in 1955 to study
aerospace engineering in Madras Institute of Technology. While Kalam was working
on a senior class project, the Dean was dissatisfied with his lack of progress
and threatened to revoke his scholarship unless the project was finished within
the next three days. Kalam met the deadline, impressing the Dean, who later said
to him, "I was putting you under stress and asking you to meet a difficult
deadline". He narrowly missed achieving his dream of becoming a fighter pilot,
as he placed ninth in qualifiers, and only eight positions were available in the
IAF.

After graduating from the Madras Institute of Technology in 1960, Kalam joined
the Aeronautical Development Establishment of the Defence Research and
Development Organisation (DRDO) as a scientist. He started his career by
designing a small hovercraft, but remained unconvinced by his choice of a job at
DRDO. Kalam was also part of the INCOSPAR committee working under Vikram
Sarabhai, the renowned space scientist. In 1969, Kalam was transferred to the
Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) where he was the project director of
India's first Satellite Launch Vehicle (SLV-III) which successfully deployed the
Rohini satellite in near-earth orbit in July 1980; Kalam had first started work
on an expandable rocket project independently at DRDO in 1965. In 1969, Kalam
received the government's approval and expanded the programme to include more
engineers.

In 1963 to 1964, he visited NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia;
Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland; and Wallops Flight Facility.
Between the 1970s and 1990s, Kalam made an effort to develop the Polar Satellite
Launch Vehicle (PSLV) and SLV-III projects, both of which proved to be
successful.

Kalam was invited by Raja Ramanna to witness the country's first nuclear test
Smiling Buddha as the representative of TBRL, even though he had not
participated in its development. In the 1970s, Kalam also directed two projects,
Project Devil and Project Valiant, which sought to develop ballistic missiles
from the technology of the successful SLV programme. Despite the disapproval of
the Union Cabinet, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi allotted secret funds for these
aerospace projects through her discretionary powers under Kalam's directorship.
Kalam played an integral role convincing the Union Cabinet to conceal the true
nature of these classified aerospace projects. His research and educational
leadership brought him great laurels and prestige in the 1980s, which prompted
the government to initiate an advanced missile programme under his directorship.
Kalam and Dr V S Arunachalam, metallurgist and scientific adviser to the Defence
Minister, worked on the suggestion by the then Defence Minister, R. Venkataraman
on a proposal for simultaneous development of a quiver of missiles instead of
taking planned missiles one after another. R Venkatraman was instrumental in
getting the cabinet approval for allocating ₹388 crores for the mission, named
Integrated Guided Missile Development Programme (IGMDP) and appointed Kalam as
the chief executive. Kalam played a major part in developing many missiles under
the mission including Agni, an intermediate range ballistic missile and Prithvi,
the tactical surface-to-surface missile, although the projects have been
criticised for mismanagement and cost and time overruns.

Kalam served as the Chief Scientific Adviser to the Prime Minister and Secretary
of the Defence Research and Development Organisation from July 1992 to December
1999. The Pokhran-II nuclear tests were conducted during this period in which he
played an intensive political and technological role. Kalam served as the Chief
Project Coordinator, along with Rajagopala Chidambaram, during the testing
phase. Media coverage of Kalam during this period made him the country's best
known nuclear scientist. However, the director of the site test, K Santhanam,
said that the thermonuclear bomb had been a "fizzle" and criticisied Kalam for
issuing an incorrect report. Both Kalam and Chidambaram dismissed the claims.

In 1998, along with cardiologist Soma Raju, Kalam developed a low cost coronary
stent, named the "Kalam-Raju Stent". In 2012, the duo designed a rugged tablet
computer for health care in rural areas, which was named the "Kalam-Raju
Tablet".

Kalam served as the 11th President of India, succeeding K. R. Narayanan. He won
the 2002 presidential election with an electoral vote of 922,884, surpassing the
107,366 votes won by Lakshmi Sahgal. His term lasted from 25 July 2002 to 25
July 2007.

On 10 June 2002, the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) which was in power at
the time, expressed that they would nominate Kalam for the post of President,
and both the Samajwadi Party and the Nationalist Congress Party backed his
candidacy. After the Samajwadi Party announced its support for Kalam, Narayanan
chose not to seek a second term in office, leaving the field clear. Kalam said
of the announcement of his candidature:

On 18 June, Kalam filed his nomination papers in the Indian Parliament,
accompanied by Vajpayee and his senior Cabinet colleagues.

The polling for the presidential election began on 15 July 2002 in Parliament
and the state assemblies, with the media claiming that the election was a
one-sided affair and Kalam's victory was a foregone conclusion; the count was
held on 18 July. Kalam became the 11th president of the Republic of India in an
easy victory, and moved into the Rashtrapati Bhavan after he was sworn in on 25
July. Kalam was the third President of India to have been honoured with a Bharat
Ratna, India's highest civilian honour, before becoming the President. Dr
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan (1954) and Dr Zakir Hussain (1963) were the earlier
recipients of Bharat Ratna who later became the President of India. He was also
the first scientist and the first bachelor to occupy Rashtrapati Bhawan.

During his term as president, he was affectionately known as the People's
President, saying that signing the Office of Profit Bill was the toughest
decision he had taken during his tenure. Kalam was criticised for his inaction
in deciding the fate of 20 out of the 21 mercy petitions submitted to him during
his tenure. Article 72 of the Constitution of India empowers the President of
India to grant pardons, and suspend or commute the death sentence of convicts on
death row. Kalam acted on only one mercy plea in his five-year tenure as
president, rejecting the plea of rapist Dhananjoy Chatterjee, who was later
hanged. Perhaps the most notable plea was from Afzal Guru, a Kashmiri terrorist
who was convicted of conspiracy in the December 2001 attack on the Indian
Parliament and was sentenced to death by the Supreme Court of India in 2004.
While the sentence was scheduled to be carried out on 20 October 2006, the
pending action on his mercy plea resulted in him remaining on death row. He also
took the controversial decision to impose President's Rule in Bihar in 2005.

In September 2003, in an interactive session in PGI Chandigarh, Kalam supported
the need of Uniform Civil Code in India, keeping in view the population of the
country.

At the end of his term, on 20 June 2007, Kalam expressed his willingness to
consider a second term in office provided there was certainty about his victory
in the 2007 presidential election. However, two days later, he decided not to
contest the Presidential election again stating that he wanted to avoid
involving Rashtrapati Bhavan from any political processes. He did not have the
support of the left parties, Shiv Sena and UPA constituents, to receive a
renewed mandate.

Nearing the expiry of the term of the 12th President Pratibha Patil on 24 July
2012, media reports in April claimed that Kalam was likely to be nominated for
his second term. After the reports, social networking sites witnessed a number
of people supporting his candidature. The BJP potentially backed his nomination,
saying that the party would lend their support if the Trinamool Congress,
Samajwadi Party and Indian National Congress proposed him for the 2012
presidential election. A month ahead of the election, Mulayam Singh Yadav and
Mamata Banerjee also expressed their support for Kalam. Days afterwards, Mulayam
Singh Yadav backed out, leaving Mamata Banerjee as the solitary supporter. On 18
June 2012, Kalam declined to contest the 2012 presidential poll. He said of his
decision not to do so:

After leaving office, Kalam became a visiting professor at the Indian Institute
of Management Shillong, the Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad, and the
Indian Institute of Management Indore; an honorary fellow of Indian Institute of
Science, Bangalore; chancellor of the Indian Institute of Space Science and
Technology Thiruvananthapuram; professor of Aerospace Engineering at Anna
University; and an adjunct at many other academic and research institutions
across India. He taught information technology at the International Institute of
Information Technology, Hyderabad, and technology at Banaras Hindu University
and Anna University.

In May 2012, Kalam launched a programme for the youth of India called the What
Can I Give Movement, with a central theme of defeating corruption.

In 2011, Kalam was criticised by civil groups over his stand on the Koodankulam
Nuclear Power Plant; he supported the establishment of the nuclear power plant
and was accused of not speaking with the local people. The protesters were
hostile to his visit as they perceived to him to be a pro-nuclear scientist and
were unimpressed by the assurances provided by him regarding the safety features
of the plant.

On 27 July 2015, Kalam travelled to Shillong to deliver a lecture on "Creating a
Livable Planet Earth" at the Indian Institute of Management Shillong. While
climbing a flight of stairs, he experienced some discomfort, but was able to
enter the auditorium after a brief rest. At around 6:35 p.m. IST, only five
minutes into his lecture, he collapsed. He was rushed to the nearby Bethany
Hospital in a critical condition; upon arrival, he lacked a pulse or any other
signs of life. Despite being placed in the intensive care unit, Kalam was
confirmed dead of a sudden cardiac arrest at 7:45 p.m IST. His last words, to
his aide Srijan Pal Singh, were reportedly: "Funny guy! Are you doing well?"

Following his death, Kalam's body was airlifted in an Indian Air Force
helicopter from Shillong to Guwahati, from where it was flown to New Delhi on
the morning of 28 July in an air force C-130J Hercules. The flight landed at
Palam Air Base that afternoon and was received by the President, the Prime
Minister, Chief Minister of Delhi Arvind Kejriwal, and the three service chiefs
of the Indian Armed Forces, who laid wreaths on Kalam's body. His body was then
placed on a gun carriage draped with the Indian flag and taken to his Delhi
residence at 10 Rajaji Marg; there, the public and numerous dignitaries paid
homage, including former prime minister Manmohan Singh, Congress President Sonia
Gandhi and Vice-President Rahul Gandhi, and Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister
Akhilesh Yadav.

On the morning of 29 July, Kalam's body, wrapped in the Indian flag, was taken
to Palam Air Base and flown to Madurai in an air force C-130J aircraft, arriving
at Madurai Airport that afternoon. His body was received at the airport by the
three service chiefs and national and state dignitaries, including cabinet
ministers Manohar Parrikar, Venkaiah Naidu, Pon Radhakrishnan and the governors
of Tamil Nadu and Meghalaya, K Rosaiah and V. Shanmuganathan. After a brief
ceremony, Kalam's body was flown by air force helicopter to the town of
Mandapam, from where it was taken in an army truck to his hometown of
Rameswaram. Upon arriving at Rameswaram, his body was displayed in an open area
in front of the local bus station to allow the public to pay their final
respects until 8 p.m. that evening.

On 30 July 2015, the former President was laid to rest at Rameswaram's Pei
Karumbu Ground with full state honours. Over 350,000 people attended the last
rites, including the Prime Minister, the governor of Tamil Nadu and the chief
ministers of Karnataka, Kerala and Andhra Pradesh.

India reacted to Kalam's death with an outpouring of grief; numerous tributes
were paid to the former President across the nation and on social media. The
Government of India declared a seven-day state mourning period as a mark of
respect. President Pranab Mukherjee, Vice-President Hamid Ansari, Home Minister
Rajnath Singh, and other leaders condoled the former President's demise. Prime
Minister Narendra Modi said "[Dr. Kalam's] death is a great loss to the
scientific community. He took India to great heights. He showed the way." Former
Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh, who had served as prime minister under Kalam,
said, "our country has lost a great human being who made phenomenal
contributions to the promotion of self reliance in defence technologies. I
worked very closely with Dr. Kalam as prime minister and I greatly benefited
from his advice as president of our country. His life and work will be
remembered for generations to come." ISRO chairman A. S. Kiran Kumar called his
former colleague "a great personality and a gentleman", while former chairman G.
Madhavan Nair described Kalam as "a global leader" for whom "the downtrodden and
poor people were his priority. He always had a passion to convey what is in his
mind to the young generation", adding that his death left a vacuum which none
could fill.

South Asian leaders expressed condolences and lauded the late statesman. The
Bhutanese government ordered the country's flags to fly at half-staff to mourn
Kalam's death, and lit 1000 butter lamps in homage. Bhutanese Prime Minister
Tshering Tobgay expressed deep sadness, saying Kalam "was a leader greatly
admired by all people, especially the youth of India who have referred to him as
the people's President". Bangladesh Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina described Kalam
as "a rare combination of a great statesman, acclaimed scientist, and a source
of inspiration to the young generation of South Asia" and termed his death an
"irreparable loss to India and beyond". Bangladesh Nationalist Party chief
Khaleda Zia said "as a nuclear scientist, he engaged himself in the welfare of
the people". Ashraf Ghani, the President of Afghanistan, called Kalam "an
inspirational figure to millions of people," noting that "we have a lot to learn
from his life". Nepalese Prime Minister Sushil Koirala recalled Kalam's
scientific contributions to India: "Nepal has lost a good friend and I have lost
an honoured and ideal personality." The President of Pakistan, Mamnoon Hussain,
and Prime Minister of Pakistan Nawaz Sharif also expressed their grief and
condolences on his death. The President of Sri Lanka, Maithripala Sirisena, also
expressed his condolences. "Dr. Kalam was a man of firm conviction and
indomitable spirit, and I saw him as an outstanding statesman of the world. His
death is an irreparable loss not only to India but to the entire world."
Maldivian President Abdulla Yameen and Vice-President Ahmed Adheeb condoled
Kalam's death, with Yameen naming him as a close friend of the Maldives who
would continue to be an inspiration to Indians and generations of South Asians.
Former president Maumoon Abdul Gayoom, who had made an official visit to India
during Kalam's presidency, termed his demise as a great loss to all of
humankind. The Commander-in-Chief of the Myanmar Armed Forces, Senior General
Min Aung Hlaing, expressed condolences on behalf of the Myanmar government. The
Dalai Lama expressed his sadness and offered condolences and prayers, calling
Kalam's death "an irreparable loss".

Kathleen Wynne, the Premier of Ontario, which Kalam had visited on numerous
occasions, expressed "deepest condolences ... as a respected scientist, he
played a critical role in the development of the Indian space programme. As a
committed educator, he inspired millions of young people to achieve their very
best. And as a devoted leader, he gained support both at home and abroad,
becoming known as 'the people's President'. I join our Indo–Canadian families,
friends, and neighbours in mourning the passing of this respected leader."
United States President Barack Obama extended "deepest condolences to the people
of India on the passing of former Indian President Dr. APJ Abdul Kalam", and
highlighted his achievements as a scientist and as a statesman, notably his role
in strengthening US–India relations and increasing space co-operation between
the two nations. "Suitably named 'the People's President', Dr. Kalam's humility
and dedication to public service served as an inspiration to millions of Indians
and admirers around the world." Russian President Vladimir Putin expressed
sincere condolences and conveyed his sympathy and support "to the near and dear
ones of the deceased leader, to the government, and entire people of India". He
remarked on Kalam's outstanding "personal contribution to the social, economic,
scientific, and technical progress of India and in ensuring its national
security," adding that Dr Kalam would be remembered as a "consistent exponent of
closer friendly relations between our nations, who has done a lot for cementing
mutually beneficial Russian–Indian cooperation." Other international
leaders—including former Indonesian president Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono,
Malaysian Prime Minister Najib Razak, Singaporean Prime Minister Lee Hsien
Loong, President of the United Arab Emirates Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan,
and Vice-President and Prime Minister of the United Arab Emirates and emir of
Dubai Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum—also paid tribute to Kalam. In a
special gesture, Secretary-General of the United Nations Ban Ki-moon visited the
Permanent Mission of India to the UN and signed a condolence book. "The
outpouring of grief around the world is a testament of the respect and
inspiration he has garnered during and after his presidency. The UN joins the
people of India in sending our deepest condolences for this great statesman. May
he rest in peace and eternity", Ban wrote in his message.

Kalam was the youngest of five siblings, the eldest of whom was a sister, Asim
Zohra (d. 1997), followed by three elder brothers: Mohammed Muthu Meera Lebbai
Maraikayar (b. 1916; aged 99), Mustafa Kamal (d. 1999) and Kasim Mohammed (d.
1995). He was extremely close to his elder siblings and their extended families
throughout his life, and would regularly send small sums of money to his older
relations, himself remaining a lifelong bachelor.

Kalam was noted for his integrity and his simple lifestyle. He never owned a
television, and was in the habit of rising at 6:30 or 7 a.m and sleeping by 2
a.m. His few personal possessions included his books, his veena, some articles
of clothing, a CD player and a laptop; at his death, he left no will, and his
possessions went to his eldest brother, who survived him.

In the 2011 Hindi film I Am Kalam, Kalam is portrayed as a positive influence on
a poor but bright Rajasthani boy named Chhotu, who renames himself Kalam in
honour of his idol.

Religion and spirituality were very important to Kalam throughout his life. In
fact, he made his own spiritual journey the subject of his final book,
Transcendence: My Spiritual Experiences with Pramukh Swamiji.

A proud and practising Muslim, daily namāz and fasting during Ramadan were
integral to Kalam's life. His father, the imam of a mosque in his hometown of
Rameswaram, had strictly instilled these Islamic customs in his children. His
father had also impressed upon the young Kalam the value of interfaith respect
and dialogue. As Kalam recalled: "Every evening, my father A.P. Jainulabdeen, an
imam, Pakshi Lakshmana Sastry, the head priest of the Ramanathaswamy Hindu
temple, and a church priest used to sit with hot tea and discuss the issues
concerning the island." Such early exposure convinced Kalam that the answers to
India's multitudinous issues lay in "dialogue and cooperation" among the
country's religious, social, and political leaders. Moreover, since Kalam
believed that "respect for other faiths" was one of the key cornerstones of
Islam, he was fond of saying: "For great men, religion is a way of making
friends; small people make religion a fighting tool."

One component of Kalam's widespread popularity among diverse groups in India,
and an enduring aspect of his legacy, is the syncretism he embodied in
appreciating various elements of the many spiritual and cultural traditions of
India. In addition to his faith in the Koran and Islamic practice, Kalam was
well-versed in Hindu traditions; he learnt Sanskrit, read the Bhagavad Gita and
he was a vegetarian. Kalam also enjoyed writing Tamil poetry, playing the veena
(a South Indian string instrument), and listening to Carnatic devotional music
every day. In 2002, in one of his early speeches to Parliament after becoming
President, he reiterated his desire for a more united India, stating that
"[d]uring the last one year I met a number of spiritual leaders of all religions
... [and] I would like to endeavour to work for bringing about unity of minds
among the divergent traditions of our country". Describing Kalam as a unifier of
diverse traditions, Congress leader Shashi Tharoor stated, "Kalam was a complete
Indian, an embodiment of the eclecticism of India's heritage of diversity". BJP
leader L. K. Advani concurred that Kalam was "the best exemplar of the Idea of
India, one who embodied the best of all the cultural and spiritual traditions
that signify India's unity in immense diversity. This was most strikingly
evident in the second-to-last book he published, presciently titled
Transcendence: My Spiritual Experiences with Pramukh Swami.

Kalam's desire to meet spiritual leaders to help create a more prosperous,
spiritual, and unified India was what initially led him to meet Pramukh Swami,
the Hindu guru of the BAPS Swaminarayan Sampradaya, who Kalam would come to
consider his ultimate spiritual teacher and guru. The first of eight meetings
between Kalam and Pramukh Swami over a fourteen-year period took place on 30
June 2001 in New Delhi, during which Kalam described being immediately drawn to
Pramukh Swami's simplicity and spiritual purity. Kalam stated that he was
inspired by Pramukh Swami throughout their numerous interactions. One such
incident occurred the day following the terrorist attack on BAPS' Akshardham,
Gandhinagar complex in September 2002; Pramukh Swami prayed for, and sprinkled
holy water upon, the sites of all of the deceased, including the terrorists,
demonstrating the view that all human life is sacred. Kalam recalled being moved
by Pramukh Swami's equanimity and compassion, citing this incident as one of his
motivations for writing Transcendence: My Spiritual Experiences with Pramukh
Swamiji. Summarising the effect that Pramukh Swami had on him, Kalam stated that
"[Pramukh Swami] has indeed transformed me. He is the ultimate stage of the
spiritual ascent in my life ... Pramukh Swamiji has put me in a God-synchronous
orbit. No manoeuvres are required any more, as I am placed in my final position
in eternity." Following Kalam's death a month after his final book was released,
co-author Arun Tiwari pointed to this passage as potentially prophetic and
premonitory of Kalam's death.

In his book India 2020, Kalam strongly advocated an action plan to develop India
into a "knowledge superpower" and a developed nation by the year 2020. He
regarded his work on India's nuclear weapons programme as a way to assert
India's place as a future superpower.

Kalam describes a "transformative moment" in his life when he asked Pramukh
Swami, the guru of the BAPS Swaminarayan Sampradaya, how India might realise
this five-pronged vision of development.  Pramukh Swami's answer—to add a sixth
area developing faith in God and spirituality to overcome the current climate of
crime and corruption—became the spiritual vision for the next 15 years Kalam's
life, which he describes in his final book, Transcendence: My Spiritual
Experiences with Pramukh Swamiji, published just a month before his death.

It was reported that there was considerable demand in South Korea for translated
versions of books authored by him.

Kalam took an active interest in other developments in the field of science and
technology, including a research programme for developing biomedical implants.
He also supported open source technology over proprietary software, predicting
that the use of free software on a large scale would bring the benefits of
information technology to more people.

Kalam set a target of interacting with 100,000 students during the two years
after his resignation from the post of scientific adviser in 1999. He explained,
"I feel comfortable in the company of young people, particularly high school
students. Henceforth, I intend to share with them experiences, helping them to
ignite their imagination and preparing them to work for a developed India for
which the road map is already available." His dream is to let every student to
light up the sky with victory using their latent fire in the heart.

Kalam received 7 honorary doctorates from 40 universities. The Government of
India honoured him with the Padma Bhushan in 1981 and the Padma Vibhushan in
1990 for his work with ISRO and DRDO and his role as a scientific advisor to the
Government. In 1997, Kalam received India's highest civilian honour, the Bharat
Ratna, for his contribution to the scientific research and modernisation of
defence technology in India. In 2013, he was the recipient of the Von Braun
Award from the National Space Society "to recognize excellence in the management
and leadership of a space-related project".

Following his death, Kalam received numerous tributes. The Tamil Nadu state
government announced that his birthday, 15 October, would be observed across the
state as "Youth Renaissance Day;" the state government further instituted the
"Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam Award," constituting an 8-gram gold medal, a certificate
and ₹500,000 (US$7,400). The award will be awarded annually on Independence Day,
beginning in 2015, to residents of the state with achievements in promoting
scientific growth, the humanities or the welfare of students.

On occasion of his birth day (2015), CBSE has given the topics on his name in
the CBSE expression series.

Wheeler Island, a national missile test site in Odisha, was renamed Abdul Kalam
Island in September 2015.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Beach_Boys

The Beach Boys are an American rock band formed in Hawthorne, California in
1961. The group's original lineup consisted of brothers Brian, Dennis, and Carl
Wilson, their cousin Mike Love, and their friend Al Jardine. Distinguished by
their vocal harmonies and early surf songs, they are one of the most influential
acts of the rock era. The group, led by their principal songwriter and producer
Brian, pioneered novel approaches to popular music form and production,
combining their affinities for jazz-based vocal groups, 1950s rock and roll, and
black R&B to create their unique sound. He later arranged his compositions for
studio orchestras and explored a variety of other styles, often incorporating
classical or jazz elements and unconventional recording techniques in innovative
ways.

The Beach Boys began as a garage band managed by the Wilsons' father Murry, with
Brian's increasingly sophisticated songwriting and recording abilities
dominating their creative direction. Emerging at the vanguard of the "California
Sound", they performed original material that reflected a southern California
youth culture of surfing, cars, and romance. After 1964, they abandoned the
surfing aesthetic for more personal lyrics and multi-layered sounds. In 1966,
the Pet Sounds album and "Good Vibrations" single vaulted the group to the top
level of rock innovators and established the band as symbols of the nascent
counterculture era. Following Smile's dissolution, Brian gradually ceded
production and songwriting duties to the rest of the band, reducing his input
because of mental health and substance abuse issues. The group's public image
subsequently faltered, and despite efforts to continue their psychedelic
avant-garde phase and reclaim their hippie audiences, they were dismissed as an
embodiment of the values and outlooks shared by early 1960s white, suburban
teenagers.

The continued success of their greatest hits albums during the mid 1970s
precipitated the band's transition into an oldies act, a move that was
denigrated by critics and many fans. Since the 1980s, much-publicized legal
wrangling over royalties, songwriting credits and use of the band's name
transpired. Dennis drowned in 1983 and Carl died of lung cancer in 1998. After
Carl's death, many live configurations of the band fronted by Mike Love and
Bruce Johnston continued to tour into the 2000s while other members pursued solo
projects. Even though Wilson and Jardine have not performed with Love and
Johnston's band since their one-off 2012 reunion tour, they remain a part of the
Beach Boys' corporation, Brother Records Inc.

The Beach Boys are one of the most critically acclaimed, commercially
successful, and widely influential bands of all time. The group had over eighty
songs chart worldwide, thirty-six of them US Top 40 hits (the most by an
American rock band), four reaching number-one on the Billboard Hot 100 chart.
The Beach Boys have sold in excess of 100 million records worldwide, making them
one of the world's best-selling bands of all time and are listed at No. 12 on
Rolling Stone magazine's 2004 list of the "100 Greatest Artists of All Time".
They received their only Grammy Award for The Smile Sessions (2011). The core
quintet of the three Wilsons, Love and Jardine were inducted into the Rock and
Roll Hall of Fame in 1988.

At the time of his sixteenth birthday on June 20, 1958, Brian Wilson shared a
bedroom with his brothers, Dennis and Carl – aged thirteen and eleven,
respectively – in their family home in Hawthorne. He had watched his father,
Murry Wilson, play piano, and had listened intently to the harmonies of vocal
groups such as the Four Freshmen. After dissecting songs such as "Ivory Tower"
and "Good News", Brian would teach family members how to sing the background
harmonies. For his birthday that year, Brian received a reel-to-reel tape
recorder. He learned how to overdub, using his vocals and those of Carl and
their mother. Brian played piano with Carl and David Marks, an eleven-year-old
longtime neighbor, playing guitars they had each received as Christmas presents.

Soon Brian and Carl were avidly listening to Johnny Otis' KFOX radio show.
Inspired by the simple structure and vocals of the rhythm and blues songs he
heard, Brian changed his piano-playing style and started writing songs.[citation
needed] His enthusiasm interfered with his music studies at school. Family
gatherings brought the Wilsons in contact with cousin Mike Love. Brian taught
Love's sister Maureen and a friend harmonies. Later, Brian, Mike Love and two
friends performed at Hawthorne High School. Brian also knew Al Jardine, a high
school classmate.[citation needed] Brian suggested to Jardine that they team up
with his cousin and brother Carl. Love gave the fledgling band its name: "The
Pendletones", a portmanteau of "Pendleton", a style of woolen shirt popular at
the time and "tone", the musical term. Though surfing motifs were prominent in
their early songs, Dennis was the only avid surfer in the group. He suggested
that the group compose songs that celebrated the sport and the lifestyle that it
had inspired in Southern California.[nb 1]

Jardine and a singer friend, Gary Winfrey, went to Brian to see if he could help
out with a version of a folk song they wanted to record – "Sloop John
B".[citation needed] In Brian's absence, the two spoke with their father, a
music industry veteran of modest success. Murry arranged for the Pendletones to
meet his publisher, Hite Morgan. The group performed a slower ballad, "Their
Hearts Were Full of Spring", but failed to impress Morgan. After an awkward
pause, Dennis mentioned they had an original song, "Surfin'".[citation needed]
Brian finished the song, and together with Mike Love, wrote "Surfin' Safari".
The group rented guitars, drums, amplifiers and microphones, and practiced for
three days while the Wilsons' parents were on a short vacation.

In October 1961, the Pendletones recorded the two surfing song demos in twelve
takes at Keen Recording Studio.[not in citation given][nb 2] Murry brought the
demos to Herb Newman, owner of Candix Records and Era Records, and he signed the
group on December 8, 1961. When the boys eagerly unpacked the first box of
singles – released both under the Candix label, and also as a promo issue under
X Records (Morgan's label) – they were shocked to see their band had been
renamed as the Beach Boys.[citation needed] Murry Wilson learned that Candix
wanted to name the group the Surfers to directly associate them with the
increasingly popular teen sport. But Russ Regan, a young promoter with Era
Records – who later became president of 20th Century Fox Records – noted that
there already existed a group by that name, and he suggested calling them the
Beach Boys.

Released in December 1961, "Surfin'" soon aired on KFWB and KRLA, two of Los
Angeles' most influential teen radio stations.[citation needed] It was a hit on
the West Coast, going to number three in Southern California, and peaked at
number 75 on the national pop charts. By the final weeks of 1961 "Surfin'" had
sold more than 40,000 copies. By this time the de facto manager of the Beach
Boys, Murry Wilson landed the group's first paying gig (for which they earned
$300) on New Year's Eve, 1961, at the Ritchie Valens Memorial Dance in Long
Beach, headlined by Ike & Tina Turner.[citation needed] In their earliest public
appearances, the band wore heavy wool jacket-like shirts that local surfers
favored before switching to their trademark striped shirts and white pants.
Murry effectively seized managerial control of the band, and Brian acknowledged
that he "deserves credit for getting us off the ground ... he hounded us
mercilessly ... [but] also worked hard himself."[citation needed]

In the first half of February 1962, Jardine left the band and was replaced by
Marks. The band recorded two more originals on April 19 at Western Studios, Los
Angeles: "Lonely Sea" and "409". They also re-recorded "Surfin'
Safari".[citation needed] During early 1962, Morgan requested that some of the
members add vocals to a couple of instrumental tracks that he had recorded with
other musicians. This led to the creation of the short-lived group Kenny & the
Cadets, which Brian led under the pseudonym "Kenny". The other members were
Carl, Jardine, and the Wilsons' mother Audree.[nb 3]

On June 4, the Beach Boys released their second single "Surfin' Safari" backed
with "409". The release prompted national coverage in the June 9 issue of
Billboard. The magazine praised Love's lead vocal and said the song had strong
hit potential. On July 16, 1962 – after being turned down by Dot and Liberty –
the Beach Boys signed a seven-year contract with Capitol Records, based on the
strength of the June demo session. This was at the urging of Capitol exec Nick
Venet who signed the group, seeing them as the "teenage gold" he had been
scouting for. By November, their first album was ready – Surfin' Safari, which
reached 32 on the US Billboard charts. Their song output continued along the
same commercial line, focusing on California youth lifestyle.

In January 1963, three months after the release of their debut album, the band
began recording their sophomore effort, Surfin' U.S.A., a breakthrough for
Brian, who began asserting himself as songwriter and arranger. The LP was the
start of Brian's penchant for doubletracking vocals, a pioneering innovation.
Released on March 25, 1963, Surfin' U.S.A., met a more enthusiastic reception,
reaching number two on the Billboard charts.[citation needed] This propelled the
band into a nationwide spotlight, and was vital to launching surf music as a
national craze. Five days prior to the release of Surfin' U.S.A., Brian produced
"Surf City", a song he had written for Jan and Dean. "Surf City" hit number one
on the Billboard charts in July 1963, a development that pleased Brian but
angered Murry, who felt his son had "given away" what should have been the Beach
Boys' first chart-topper.

At the beginning of a tour of the Mid-West in April 1963, Jardine rejoined the
Beach Boys at Brian's request. As he began playing live gigs again, Brian left
the road to focus on writing and recording. The result of this arrangement
produced the albums Surfer Girl, released on September 16, 1963 and Little Deuce
Coupe, released less than a month later on October 7, 1963. This sextet
incarnation of the Beach Boys did not extend beyond these two albums, as Marks
officially left the band in early October because of conflict with manager
Murry, pulling Brian back into touring.

Around this time, Brian began using members of the Wrecking Crew to augment his
increasingly demanding studio arrangements. Session musicians that participated
on Wilson's productions were said to have been awestruck by his musical
abilities.[nb 4] The band released a standalone Christmas-themed single, "Little
Saint Nick", in December 1963, backed with an a cappella rendition of the
scriptural song "The Lord's Prayer". The A-side peaked at No. 3 on the US
Billboard Christmas chart.

Following a successful Australasian tour in January and February 1964, the band
returned home to face the British Invasion through the Beatles appearances on
The Ed Sullivan Show. Also representing the Beatles, Capitol support for the
Beach Boys immediately began waning. This caused Murry to fight for the band at
the label more than before, often visiting their offices without warning to
"twist executive arms."[nb 5] The band finished the sessions on February 20,
1964 and titled the album Shut Down Volume 2. "Fun, Fun, Fun" was released as a
single from the album (backed with "Why Do Fools Fall in Love") and was a major
hit. The LP, while containing several filler tracks, was propelled by other
songs such as the melancholic "The Warmth of the Sun" and the advanced
production style of "Don't Worry Baby".

Brian soon wrote his last surf song in April 1964. That month, during recording
of the single "I Get Around", Murry was relieved of his duties as manager. Brian
reflected, "We love the family thing – y'know: three brothers, a cousin and a
friend is a really beautiful way to have a group – but the extra generation can
become a hang-up." When the single was released in May of that year, it would
climb to number one, their first single to do so, proving that the Beach Boys
could compete with contemporaneous British pop groups. Two months later, the
album that the song appeared on, All Summer Long, reached No. 4 on the Billboard
200 charts. All Summer Long introduced exotic textures to the Beach Boys' sound
exemplified by the piccolos and xylophones of its title track. The album was a
swan-song to the surf and car music the Beach Boys built their commercial
standing upon. Later albums took a different stylistic and lyrical path. Before
this, a live album, Beach Boys Concert, was released in October to a four-week
chart stay at number one, containing a setlist of previously recorded hits and
covers that they had not yet recorded. It was the first live album that ever
topped pop music record charts.

In June 1964, Brian began recording the bulk of The Beach Boys' Christmas Album
with a forty-one-piece studio orchestra in collaboration with Four Freshmen
arranger Dick Reynolds. Released in December, it was divided between five new,
original Christmas-themed songs, and seven reinterpretations of traditional
Christmas songs. It would be regarded as one of the finest holiday albums of the
rock era. One single from the album, "The Man with All the Toys", was released,
peaking at No. 6 on the US Billboard Christmas chart. On October 29, the Beach
Boys performed for The T.A.M.I. Show, a concert film intended to bring together
a wide range of hit-making musicians for a one-off performance. The result was
released to movie theaters one month later.

By the end of the year, the stress of road travel, composing, producing and
maintaining a high level of creativity became too much for Brian. On December
23, while on a flight from Los Angeles to Houston, he suffered a panic attack
only hours after performing with the Beach Boys on the musical variety series
Shindig!. In January 1965, he announced his withdrawal from touring to
concentrate entirely on songwriting and record production. For the rest of 1964
and into 1965, Glen Campbell served as Wilson's temporary replacement in
concert, until his own career success pulled him from the group in April 1965.
Bruce Johnston was asked to locate a replacement for Campbell; having failed to
find one, Johnston himself became a full-time member of the band on May 19,
1965, first replacing Brian on the road and later contributing in the studio,
beginning with the vocal sessions for "California Girls" on June 4, 1965.

After Brian stopped touring in 1965, he became a full-time studio artist,
showcasing a great leap forward with The Beach Boys Today!, an album containing
a suite-like structure divided by songs and ballads, and portended the Album Era
with its cohesive artistic statement. During the recording sessions for Today!,
Love told Melody Maker that he and the band wanted to look beyond surf rock and
to avoid living in the past or resting on their laurels. The resulting LP had
largely guitar-oriented pop songs such as "Dance, Dance, Dance" and "Good to My
Baby" on side A with B-side ballads such as "Please Let Me Wonder" and "She
Knows Me Too Well".

Today! established the Beach Boys as album artists and marked a maturation in
their lyric content by abandoning themes related to surfing, cars, or teenage
love. Some love songs remained, but with a marked increase in depth, along with
introspective tracks accompanied by adventurous and distinct arrangements. While
the band's contemporaries grew more intellectually aware, Capitol continued to
bill them as "America’s Top Surfin' Group!" expecting Brian to write more
surfing material for the yearly summer markets despite his disinterest.

In June 1965, the band released Summer Days (And Summer Nights!!). The album
included a reworked arrangement of "Help Me, Rhonda" which became the band's
second number one single in the spring of 1965, displacing the Beatles' "Ticket
to Ride". "Let Him Run Wild" tapped into the youthful angst that later pervaded
their music.[according to whom?] In November 1965, the group followed their US
number-three-charting "California Girls" from Summer Days (And Summer Nights!!)
with another top-twenty single, "The Little Girl I Once Knew". It was considered
the band's most experimental statement thus far, using silence as a pre-chorus,
clashing keyboards, moody brass and vocal tics.[according to whom?] The single
continued Brian's ambitions for daring arrangements, featuring unexpected tempo
changes and numerous false endings. Perhaps too extreme an arrangement[according
to whom?] to go much higher than its number 20 peak, it was the band's second
single not to reach the top ten since their 1962 breakthrough.[citation needed]

Capitol demanded a Beach Boys LP for the 1965 Christmas season, and to appease
them, Brian conceived Beach Boys' Party!, a live-in-the-studio album consisting
mostly of acoustic covers of 1950s rock and R&B songs, in addition to covers of
three Beatles songs, Bob Dylan's "The Times They Are a-Changin'", and
idiosyncratic rerecordings of the group's earlier hits. In December they scored
an unexpected number two hit (number three in the UK) with "Barbara Ann", which
Capitol released as a single with no band input. Originally by the Regents, it
became one of the Beach Boys' most recognized hits.[citation needed]

In 1966, the Beach Boys formally established their use of unconventional
instruments and elaborate layers of vocal harmonies on their album Pet Sounds.
It is considered Brian's most concise demonstration of his production and
songwriting expertise. With songs such as "Wouldn't It Be Nice" and "Sloop John
B", the album's innovative soundscape incorporates elements of jazz, classical,
pop, exotica, and the avant-garde. The instrumentation combines found sounds
such as bicycle bells and dog whistles with classically inspired orchestrations
and the usual rock set-up of drums and guitars; among others, silverware,
accordions, plucked piano strings, barking dogs, and plastic water jugs. For the
basic rhythmic feel for "God Only Knows", harpsichord, piano with slapback echo,
sleigh bells, and strings spilled into each other to create a rich blanket of
sound.

Released in May, Pet Sounds peaked at No. 10 in the US and No. 2 in the UK. This
helped the Beach Boys become the strongest selling album group in the UK for the
final quarter of 1966, dethroning the three-year reign of native bands such as
the Beatles. Met with a lukewarm critical reception in the US, Pet Sounds was
indifferently promoted by Capitol and failed to become the major hit Wilson had
hoped it would be. Its failure to gain a wider recognition in the U.S. combined
with Capitol's decision to issue Best of The Beach Boys in July dispirited
Brian, who considered Pet Sounds an extremely personal work. Some assumed that
the label considered the album a risk, appealing more to an older demographic
than the younger, female audience the Beach Boys built their commercial standing
on. Pet Sounds sales numbered approximately 500,000 units, a significant
drop-off from the chain of million-selling albums that immediately preceded it.
Best of The Beach Boys was quickly certified Gold by the RIAA.

Pet Sounds is considered by some as a Brian Wilson solo album in all but name,
as other members contributed relatively little to the compositions or
recordings. Influenced by psychedelic drugs, Brian turned inward and probed his
deep-seated self-doubts and emotional longings; the piece did not address the
problems in the world around them, unlike other psychedelic rock groups. As Jim
Miller wrote of the album's tone, "[It] vented Wilson's obsession with isolation
cataloging a forlorn quest for security. The whole enterprise, which smacked of
song cycle pretensions, was streaked with regret and romantic languor."
According to Brian, the album was designed as a collection of art pieces that
belong together yet could stand alone. In a 1972 retrospective review of the
album, music journalist Stephen Davis wrote: "From first cut to last we were
treated to an intense, linear personal vision of the vagaries of a love affair
and the painful, introverted anxieties that are the wrenching precipitates of
the unstable chemistry of any love relationship. This trenchant cycle of love
songs has the emotional impact of a shatteringly evocative novel ... nobody was
prepared for anything so soulful, so lovely, something one had to think about so
much."

Pet Sounds was massively influential upon its release, vaunting the band to the
top level of rock innovators. It is one of the earliest rock concept albums, one
of the earliest concept albums of the counterculture era, and an early album in
the emerging psychedelic rock style, signaling a turning point wherein rock,
which previously had been considered dance music, became music that was made for
listening to. In 2016, The Guardian's Barbara Ellen reflected that the album was
"hailed as a revolution in harmonies and production techniques ... Wilson
single-handedly reinvented the album as the in-depth illumination of an artist’s
soul, kicking open a creative fire-door, liberating the album to exist as a
self-contained art form on a par with literature, theatre, art, cinema, dance…
anything the artist desired." Reflecting on the album on its 50th anniversary,
PopMatters' Danilo Castro added:

In The Album: A Guide to Pop Music's Most Provocative, Influential, and
Important Creations, author James Perone championed the album for its complex
orchestrations, sophisticated compositions, and varied tone colors, calling it a
remove from "just about anything else that was going on in 1966 pop music." In
1976, journalist Robin Denselow wrote: "With the 1966 Pet Sounds album ...
Wilson had become America's equivalent of the Beatles with his ability to expand
the limits of popular taste." Paul McCartney named it one of his favorite albums
of all time on multiple occasions, calling it the primary impetus for the
Beatles' album Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band (1967). In 2003, Pet Sounds
was ranked second in "The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" list selected by
Rolling Stone, behind only Sgt. Pepper. In 2004, the album was acknowledged as
an important historical and cultural work by the Library of Congress.

Seeking to expand on Pet Sounds' advances, Wilson began an even more ambitious
project: "Good Vibrations". Like Pet Sounds, Brian opted for an eclectic array
of instruments rarely heard in pop music. Described by Brian as a "pocket
symphony", it contains a mixture of classical, rock, and exotic instruments
structured around a cut-up mosaic of musical sections represented by several
discordant key and modal shifts. It became the Beach Boys' biggest hit to date,
and a US and UK number one single in 1966. Coming at a time when pop singles
were usually made in under two hours, it was one of the most complex pop
productions ever undertaken, and the most expensive single ever recorded to that
point. The production costs were estimated between $50,000 and $75,000 ($370,000
and $550,000 today) with sessions for the song stretching over several months in
at least four major studios. According to Domenic Priore, the making of "Good
Vibrations" was unlike anything previous in the realms of classical, jazz,
international, soundtrack, or any other kind of recording.

The single was an unequivocal milestone in studio productions, and continued in
establishing Brian as an extender of popular tastes. To the counterculture of
the 1960s, "Good Vibrations" served as an anthem. Rock critic Gene Sculatti
prophesied in 1968, "[It] may yet prove to be the most significantly
revolutionary piece of the current rock renaissance." Its instrumentation
included Paul Tanner's Electro-Theremin, a manually-operated oscillator with a
sound similar to a theremin, which helped the Beach Boys claim a new hippie
audience. Upon release, the single prompted an unexpected revival in theremins
while increasing awareness of analog synthesizers, leading Moog Music to produce
their own brand of ribbon-controlled instruments. Reflecting on this period in
1971, Cue magazine wrote: "In the year and a half that followed Pet Sounds, the
Beach Boys were among the vanguard in practically every aspect of the counter
culture – psychedelia, art rock, a return to roots, ecology, organic food, the
cooled-out sound – anticipating changes that rock didn't accomplish until
1969–1970." The group established a short-lived film production company, called
Home Movies, during this time. It was supposed to have created live action film
and television properties starring the Beach Boys. However, the company
completed only one music video, for "Good Vibrations", though various other
psychedelic sequences and segments exist.

Brian met lyricist and musician Van Dyke Parks while working on Pet Sounds. A
year later, while in the midst of recording "Good Vibrations", the duo began an
intense collaboration that resulted in a suite of challenging new songs for the
Beach Boys' forthcoming album Smile, intended to surpass Pet Sounds. Recording
for the album spanned about a year, from 1966 to 1967. Wilson and Parks intended
Smile to be a continuous suite of songs that were linked both thematically and
musically, with the main songs being linked together by small vocal pieces and
instrumental segments that elaborated upon the musical themes of the major
songs. Surviving recordings have shown that the music incorporated chanting,
cowboy songs, explorations in Indian and Hawaiian music, jazz, tone poems with
classical elements, cartoon sound effects, musique concrète, and yodeling.

In October 1966 interviews, Brian touted the album "a teenage symphony to God".
His spiritual aims were made explicit in the album's musical contents and
lyrics, which also included existential angst, the exploration of human
innocence, and the philosophy of childlikeness. Parks has stated: he and Brian
were conscious of the counterculture, and the two had felt estranged from it,
but it was necessary to adhere to because of a willingness to "get out of the
Eisenhower mindset." Parks stresses, "At the same time, he didn't want to lose
that kind of gauche sensibility that he had. He was doing stuff that nobody
would dream of doing," citing an instance when Brian instructed a banjo player
to play only one string, a "gauche" style of playing that "just wasn't done."

Smile would go on to become the most legendary unreleased album in the history
of popular music. In the decades following its non-release, it became the
subject of intense speculation and mystique. Many believe that, had the album
been released, it would have substantially altered the group's direction and
established them at the vanguard of rock innovators. Writing about the album for
the 33⅓ book series, Luis Sanchez stated: "If Brian Wilson and the Beach Boys
were going to survive as the defining force of American pop music they were,
Smile was a conscious attempt to rediscover the impulses and ideas that power
American consciousness from the inside out. It was a collaboration that led to
some incredible music, which, if it had been completed as an album and delivered
to the public in 1966, might have had an incredible impact."

If released when intended, composer Frank Oteri believes the album would have
been the first piece of album-oriented rock. Its cover artwork, now considered
iconic, depicted an illustration of a store selling smiles, also would have been
among the earliest covers by a popular music group to feature original,
specifically commissioned artwork rather than a photograph of the performers.
Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, bootlegs from its recording sessions leaked,
inspiring many attempts to reassemble the album, and ultimately becoming a
progenitor for indie rock.

Many factors combined to put intense pressure on Brian Wilson as Smile neared
completion: his mental instability, the pressure to create despite fierce
internal opposition to his new music, the relatively unenthusiastic response to
Pet Sounds in the United States, and Carl Wilson's draft resistance.[citation
needed] Furthermore, Wilson's reliance on both prescription drugs and
amphetamines exacerbated his underlying mental health problems. Comparable to
Brian Jones and Syd Barrett, Brian Wilson's use of psychedelic drugs led to a
nervous breakdown in the late-1960s.[citation needed] As his legend grew, the
Smile period came to be seen as the pivotal episode in his decline, and he
became tagged as a drug casualty.

Some Smile tracks were salvaged and re-recorded in scaled-down versions at
Brian's new home studio. Along with the single version of "Good Vibrations",
these tracks were released on the September 1967 album Smiley Smile, which
elicited positive critical and commercial response abroad, but was the first
real commercial failure for the group in the U.S. Compounding the group's recent
setbacks, their public image took a cataclysmic hit following their withdrawal
from the 1967 Monterey Pop Festival for the reason that they had no new material
to play while their forthcoming single and album lay in limbo. Their
cancellation was seen as "...a damning admission that they were washed up [and]
unable to compete with the new music." This notion was exacerbated by Rolling
Stone writer Jann Wenner, who in contemporary publications criticized Brian
Wilson for his oft-repeated "genius" label, which he called a "promotional
shuck" and an attempt to compare him with the Beatles.

While being interviewed in August 1967 for the aborted live album Lei'd in
Hawaii, Brian stated: "I think rock n' roll–the pop scene–is happening. It’s
great. But I think basically, the Beach Boys are squares. We’re not
happening."[page needed] Former band publicist Derek Taylor later recalled a
conversation with Brian and Dennis where they denied that the group had ever
written surf music or songs about cars, and that the Beach Boys had never been
involved with the surf and hot rod fads, as Taylor claimed, "...they would not
concede." As a result of their initial target demographic and subsequent
failures to blend with the hippie movement, the group was viewed as unhip
relics, even though they had once been, as biographer Peter Ames Carlin wrote,
"the absolute center of the American rock ’n’ roll scene," a time when they had
ushered the psychedelic era. In early 1969, Brian proposed that the group change
their name from "the Beach Boys" to "the Beach", reasoning that the band members
were now grown men. Going to the effort of acquiring a contract that would
declare a five-way agreement to officially rename the group, Stephen Desper
reported, "They all just kind of shrugged and said, 'Aw, come on, Brian, we
don't wanna do that. That's how the public knows us, man. And that was it. He
put the paper on the piano and it stayed there until I picked it up and took it
away."

In 1966, the group had filed a lawsuit in the Los Angeles Superior Court against
Capitol Records for over two million dollars, which briefly severed their
relationship with the label. At this time the Beach Boys' management (Nick
Grillo and David Anderle) created the band's own record label, Brother. One of
the first labels owned by a rock group The initial output of the label, however,
was limited to Smiley Smile and two resulting singles from the album.[citation
needed]

After the cancellation of Smile, some of its tracks continued to trickle out in
later albums often as filler songs to offset Brian's unwillingness to
contribute.[nb 6] Smiley Smile was followed up three months later with Wild
Honey, featuring mostly new songs written by Wilson and Love, including the
number-nineteen single "Darlin'". The album fared better than its predecessor,
reaching No. 24 in the U.S.[not in citation given] Wenner responded to the new
album with more optimism, remarking two months later that "[in] any case it's
good to see that the Beach Boys are getting their heads straight once again".

After meeting Maharishi Mahesh Yogi at a UNICEF Variety Gala in Paris, France on
December 15, 1967, Love, along with other high-profile celebrities such as
Donovan and the Beatles traveled to Rishikesh in India during February and March
1968. The following Beach Boys album Friends (1968) had songs influenced by the
Transcendental Meditation taught by the Maharishi. The album reached No. 13 in
the UK and 126 in the US, the title track placing at No. 25 in the UK and No. 47
in the US, the band's lowest singles peak since 1962. In support of the Friends
album, Love had arranged for the Beach Boys to tour with the Maharishi in the
U.S., which has been called "one of the more bizarre entertainments of the era."
Starting on May 3, 1968, the tour lasted five shows and was cancelled when the
Maharishi had to withdraw to fulfill film contracts. Because of disappointing
audience numbers and the Maharishi's withdrawal, twenty-four tour dates were
subsequently canceled at a cost estimated at US$250,000 (approximately
US$1,630,000 today) for the band. This tour was followed by the release of "Do
It Again", a single that critics described as an update of the Beach Boys' surf
rock past in a late 1960s style. The single went to the top of the Australian
and UK single charts in 1968 and was moderately successful in the US, peaking at
No. 20.

For a short time in mid-1968, Brian Wilson sought psychological treatment in
hospital. During his absence, other members began writing and producing material
themselves. To complete their contract with Capitol, they produced one more
album. 20/20 (1969) was one of the group's most stylistically diverse albums,
including hard rock songs such as "All I Want to Do", the waltz-based "Time to
Get Alone", and a cover of the Ronettes' "I Can Hear Music". The diversity of
genres have been described as an indicator that the group was trying to
establish an updated identity. The album performed strongly in the UK, reaching
number three on the charts. In the US, the album reached a modest 68.

In spring 1968, Dennis began a strained relationship with musician Charles
Manson, which persisted for several months afterward. Dennis bought him time at
Brian's home studio where recording sessions were attempted while Brian stayed
in his room. Dennis then proposed that Manson be signed to Brother Records.
Brian reportedly disliked Charlie, and so a deal was never made. Without
Manson's involvement, the Beach Boys did record one song penned by Manson:
"Cease to Exist", rewritten as "Never Learn Not to Love". The idea of the Beach
Boys recording one of his songs reportedly thrilled Manson, and it was released
as a Beach Boys single. After accruing a large monetary debt to the group,
Dennis deliberately omitted Manson's credit on its release while also altering
the song's arrangement and lyrics. This greatly angered Manson. Growing fearful,
Dennis gradually distanced himself from Manson, whose family had taken over his
home. He was eventually convicted for murder conspiracy; from there on, Dennis
was too afraid of the Manson family to ever speak publicly on his relationship,
let alone testify against him.

On April 12, 1969, the band revisited their 1967 lawsuit against Capitol Records
after they alleged an audit undertaken revealed the band were owed over
US$2,000,000 (US$13,060,000 today) for unpaid royalties and production duties.
The band's contract with Capitol Records expired on June 30, 1969, after which
Capitol Records deleted the Beach Boys' catalog from print, effectively cutting
off their royalty flow. In November 1969, Murry Wilson sold Sea of Tunes, the
Beach Boys' catalog, to Irving Almo Music, a decision that, according to Marilyn
Wilson, devastated Brian. In late 1969, the Beach Boys reactivated their Brother
label and signed with Reprise. Around this time, the band commenced recording a
new album. By the time the Beach Boys tenure ended with Capitol in 1969, they
had sold 65 million records worldwide, closing the decade as the most
commercially successful American group in popular music.

In 1970, armed with the new Reprise contract, the band appeared rejuvenated,
releasing the album Sunflower to critical acclaim in the UK but indifference in
the US. The album features a strong group presence with significant writing
contributions from all band members. Brian was active during this period,
writing or co-writing seven of the twelve songs on Sunflower and performing at
half of the band's domestic concerts in 1970. Sunflower reached number 29 in the
UK and number 151 in the US, the band's lowest domestic chart showing to that
point.

After Sunflower, the band hired Jack Rieley as their manager. Under Rieley's
management, the group's music began emphasizing political and social awareness.
During this time, Carl Wilson gradually assumed leadership of the band and
Rieley contributed lyrics. On August 30, 1971 the band released Surf's Up, named
after the Brian Wilson/Van Dyke Parks composition "Surf's Up". The album was
moderately successful, reaching the US top 30, a marked improvement over their
recent releases. While the record charted, the Beach Boys added to their renewed
fame by performing a near-sellout set at Carnegie Hall, followed by an
appearance with the Grateful Dead at Fillmore East on April 27, 1971. The live
shows during this era included reworked arrangements of many of the band's
previous songs. A large portion of their set lists culled from Pet Sounds and
Smile, as author Domenic Priore observes, "They basically played what they could
have played at the Monterey Pop Festival in the summer of 1967."

Johnston ended his first stint with the band shortly after Surf's Up's release,
reportedly[by whom?] because of friction with Rieley. At Carl's suggestion, the
addition of Ricky Fataar and Blondie Chaplin in February 1972 led to a dramatic
restructuring in the band's sound. The album Carl and the Passions – "So Tough"
was an uncharacteristic mix[according to whom?] that included two songs written
by Fataar and Chaplin.

For their next project the band, their families, assorted associates and
technicians moved to the Netherlands for the summer of 1972. They rented a
farmhouse to convert into a makeshift studio where recording sessions for the
new project would take place. By the end of their sessions, the band felt they
had produced one of their strongest efforts yet.[according to whom?] Reprise,
however, felt that the album required a strong single. This resulted in the song
"Sail On, Sailor", a collaboration between Brian Wilson, Tandyn Almer, Ray
Kennedy, Jack Rieley and Van Dyke Parks featuring a soulful lead vocal by
Chaplin. Reprise subsequently approved and the resulting album, Holland, was
released early in 1973, peaking at number 37. Brian's musical children story,
Mount Vernon and Fairway (A Fairy Tale), narrated by Rieley and strongly
influenced by Randy Newman's Sail Away (1972), was included as a bonus EP.
Despite indifference from Reprise, the band's concert audience started to
grow.[citation needed]

The Beach Boys in Concert, a double album documenting the 1972 and 1973 U.S.
tours, was another top-30 album and became the band's first gold record under
Reprise. During this period the band established itself as one of America's most
popular live acts. Chaplin and Fataar helped organize the concerts to obtain a
high quality live performance, playing material off Surf's Up, Carl and the
Passions and Holland and adding songs from their older catalog. This concert
arrangement lifted them back into American public prominence. In late 1973, the
41-song soundtrack to American Graffiti was released including the band's early
songs "Surfin' Safari" and "All Summer Long". The album was a catalyst in
creating a wave of nostalgia that reintroduced the Beach Boys into contemporary
American consciousness. In 1974, Capitol Records issued Endless Summer, the
band's first major pre-Pet Sounds greatest hits package. The compilation surged
to the top of the Billboard album charts and was the group's first multi-million
selling record since "Good Vibrations". It remained on the charts for two years.
Capitol followed with a second compilation, Spirit of America, which also sold
well. With these compilations, the Beach Boys became one of the most popular
acts in rock, propelling themselves from opening for Crosby, Stills, Nash and
Young to headliners selling out basketball arenas in a matter of weeks. Rolling
Stone named the Beach Boys the "Band of the Year" for 1974, solely on the basis
of their juggernaut touring schedule and material written over a decade
earlier.[need quotation to verify]

Rieley, who remained in the Netherlands after Holland's release, was relieved of
his managerial duties in late 1973.[citation needed] Chaplin also left in late
1973 after an argument with Steve Love, the band's business manager (and Mike's
brother). Fataar remained until 1974, when he was offered a chance to join a new
group led by future Eagles member Joe Walsh. Chaplin's replacement, James
William Guercio, started offering the group career advice that resulted in his
becoming their new manager. Under Guercio, the Beach Boys staged a highly
successful 1975 joint concert tour with Chicago, with each group performing some
of the other's songs, including their previous year's collaboration on Chicago's
hit "Wishing You Were Here". Beach Boys vocals were also heard on Elton John's
1974 hit "Don't Let the Sun Go Down on Me".[citation needed] Nostalgia had
settled into the Beach Boys' hype;[according to whom?] the group had not
officially released any new material since 1973's Holland. While their concerts
continuously sold out, the stage act slowly changed from a contemporary
presentation followed by oldies encores to an entire show made up of mostly
pre-1967 music.

Recorded in the wake of California Music's demise, a supergroup that would have
involved Brian Wilson, Bruce Johnston, and record producer Terry Melcher, 15 Big
Ones (1976) marked Brian's return as a major force in the group. The album
included new songs by Brian, as well as cover versions of oldies such as "Rock
and Roll Music", "Blueberry Hill", and "In the Still of the Night". "Rock and
Roll Music" peaked at No. 5 in the U.S. Brian and Love's "It's O.K." was in the
vein of their early sixties style, and was a moderate hit.[citation needed] The
album was publicized by an August 1976 NBC-TV special, simply titled The Beach
Boys. The special, produced by Saturday Night Live (SNL) creator Lorne Michaels,
featured appearances by SNL cast members John Belushi and Dan Aykroyd.

The album was generally disliked by fans and critics upon release. During its
sessions, Brian's production role was belittled as group members overdubbed and
remixed tracks to fight against his desire for a rough, unfinished sound. Carl
and Dennis disparaged the album to the press while Brian admitted,
"[Undoubtedly] the new album is nothing too deep", but remained hopeful that
their next release would be on par with the group's "Good Vibrations".

For the remainder of 1976 to early 1977, Brian spent his time making sporadic
public appearances and producing the band's next album Love You (1977), a quirky
collection of 14 songs mostly written, arranged and produced by Brian. Brian
revealed to Peter Ames Carlin that Love You is one of his favorite Beach Boys
releases, telling him "That's when it all happened for me. That's where my heart
lies." Love You peaked at No. 28 in the UK and No. 53 in the US and developed a
cult following; regarded as one of the band's best albums by fans and critics
alike, and an early work of synthpop.

Referring to "naysayers" of the album, the underground fanzine Scram wrote,
"Fuck [them] ... [the album showcases] a truly original mix of humor and
sadness. The original numbers always dance just a step away from the cliché,
dealing with simple lyrical themes that make you wonder why they had never been
explored before." The A.V. Club – considering the album in "the same vein" as
Tonight's the Night (1975), Pussy Cats (1974), The Madcap Laughs (1970), and
Barrett (1970) – described Love You as: "something almost desperately optimistic
... Wilson sings frayed songs about roller-skating, road-tripping, and Johnny
Carson – like a frazzled man sitting in a corner chanting 'calm blue ocean' over
and over. It’s a beautiful, noisy, funny, heartbreaking work of art – one not
for everybody, yet vital for anyone who wants to understand Wilson’s overall
worldview."

After Love You was released, Brian began to record and assemble Adult/Child, an
unreleased effort largely consisting of songs written by Wilson from 1976 and
1977 with select big band arrangements by Dick Reynolds. Though publicized as
the Beach Boys' next release, Adult/Child caused tension within the group and
was ultimately shelved. Following this period, his concert appearances with the
band gradually diminished and their performances were occasionally erratic.

The internal wrangling came to a head after a show at Central Park on September
1, 1977, when the band effectively split into two camps; Dennis and Carl Wilson
on one side, Mike Love and Al Jardine on the other with Brian remaining neutral.
Following a confrontation on an airport tarmac, Dennis declared to Rolling Stone
on September 3 that he had left the band: "It was Al Jardine who really knifed
me in the heart when he said they didn't need me. That was the clincher. And all
I told him was that he couldn't play more than four chords. They kept telling me
I had my solo album now [Pacific Ocean Blue], like I should go off in a corner
and leave the Beach Boys to them. The album really bothers them. They don't like
to admit it's doing so well; they never even acknowledge it in interviews."

The band broke up for two and a half weeks, until a meeting on September 17 at
Brian's house. In light of a potential new Caribou Records contract the parties
negotiated a settlement resulting in Love gaining control of Brian's vote in the
group, allowing Love and Jardine to outvote Carl and Dennis Wilson on any
matter.[nb 7]

Dennis withdrew from the group to focus on his second solo album entitled Bambu.
The album was shelved just as alcoholism and marital problems overcame all three
Wilson brothers. Carl appeared intoxicated during concerts (especially at
appearances for their 1978 Australia tour) and Brian gradually slid back into
addiction and an unhealthy lifestyle. Love remembered: "We were in Australia,
and the Wilsons were upset that some of us were not trying heroin with them.
That was a division. ... Brian, Carl and Dennis were into one lifestyle, whereas
myself and Al Jardine and Bruce Johnston were not."

The Beach Boys' last album for Reprise, M.I.U. Album (1978), was recorded at
Maharishi International University in Iowa at the suggestion of Love. Dennis and
Carl made limited contributions; the album was mostly produced by Jardine and
Ron Altbach, with Brian credited as "executive producer". M.I.U. was largely a
contractual obligation to finish out their association with Reprise, who
likewise did not promote the result. The record cemented the divisions in the
group. Love and Jardine focused on rock and roll-oriented material while Carl
and Dennis chose the progressive focus they had established with the albums Carl
and the Passions and Holland.[citation needed]

After departing Reprise, the Beach Boys signed with CBS Records. They received a
substantial advance and were paid $1 million per album even as CBS deemed their
preliminary review of the band's first product, L.A. (Light Album) as
unsatisfactory. Faced with the realization that Brian was unable to contribute,
the band recruited Johnston as producer. The result paid off, as "Good Timin'"
became a top 40 single. The group enjoyed moderate success with a disco
reworking of the Wild Honey song "Here Comes the Night", followed by Jardine's
"Lady Lynda". The album was followed in 1980 by Keepin' the Summer Alive, with
Johnston once again producing. Barring an appearance on percussion on the
closing track, "Endless Harmony", Dennis was absent from this album.

In 1981, Carl quit the group because of unhappiness with the band's nostalgia
format and lackluster live performances, subsequently pursuing a solo career. He
returned in May 1982 – after approximately 14 months of being away – on the
condition that the group reconsider their rehearsal and touring policies and
refrain from "Las Vegas-type" engagements.

From 1980 through 1982, the Beach Boys and The Grass Roots performed
Independence Day concerts at the National Mall in Washington, D.C., attracting
large crowds. However, in April 1983, James G. Watt, President Ronald Reagan's
Secretary of the Interior, banned Independence Day concerts on the Mall by such
groups. Watt said that "rock bands" that had performed on the Mall on
Independence Day in 1981 and 1982 had encouraged drug use and alcoholism and had
attracted "the wrong element", who would steal from attendees. During the
ensuing uproar, which included over 40,000 complaints to the Department of the
Interior, the Beach Boys stated that the Soviet Union, which had invited them to
perform in Leningrad in 1978, "...obviously ... did not feel that the group
attracted the wrong element." Vice President George H. W. Bush said of the Beach
Boys, "They're my friends and I like their music". Watt later apologized to the
band after learning that President Reagan and First Lady Nancy Reagan were fans.
White House staff presented Watt with a plaster foot with a hole in it, showing
that he had "shot himself in the foot". The band returned to D.C. for
Independence Day in 1984 and performed to a crowd of 750,000 people.

In 1983, Dennis was fired by the group due to his unreliability and bizarre
onstage behavior fueled by alcohol abuse. Tensions between Dennis and Love were
so high that each obtained a restraining order against the other. Dennis'
alcoholism continued to escalate, and on December 28, 1983, he drowned in Marina
del Rey while diving from a friend's boat trying to recover items he had
previously thrown overboard in fits of rage. Despite his death, the Beach Boys
continued as a successful touring act.

On July 4, 1985, the Beach Boys played to an afternoon crowd of one million in
Philadelphia and the same evening they performed for over 750,000 people on the
Mall in Washington. They also appeared nine days later at the Live Aid concert.
That year, they released the eponymous album The Beach Boys and enjoyed a
resurgence of interest later in the 1980s, assisted by tributes such as David
Lee Roth's hit version of "California Girls".[citation needed] "Getcha Back",
released from the album, gave the group a No. 26 single in the U.S. Following
this, the group put out "Rock 'n' Roll to the Rescue" (U.S., No. 68) and a cover
of the Mamas & the Papas' "California Dreamin'" (U.S., No. 57). In 1987, they
played with the rap group The Fat Boys, performing the song "Wipe Out" and
filming a music video. It was a No. 12 single in the US and a No. 2 rank in the
UK.

By 1988, Brian had drifted from the Beach Boys and released his first solo
album, Brian Wilson. During this period the band unexpectedly claimed their
first U.S. number-one hit single in 22 years with "Kokomo", which had appeared
in the movie Cocktail, and soon became the band's largest selling single of all
time. They released the album Still Cruisin, which went gold in the U.S. In
1990, the band gathered several studio musicians and recorded the
Melcher-produced title track of the comedy Problem Child. The album Summer in
Paradise, had no new contributions from Brian because of interference from
caretaker Eugene Landy.[citation needed]

A lawsuit was filed by Brian in 1989 to reclaim the rights to his songs and the
group's publishing company, Sea of Tunes, which he had supposedly signed away to
his father Murry in 1969. He successfully argued that he had not been mentally
fit to make an informed decision and that his father had potentially forged his
signature. While Wilson failed to regain his copyrights, he was awarded
$25 million for unpaid royalties. With Love and Brian unable to determine
exactly what Love was properly owed, Love sued Brian in 1992, winning
$13 million in 1994 for lost royalties. 35 of the group's songs were then
amended to credit Love.

In 1993, the band appeared in Michael Feeney Callan's film The Beach Boys Today,
which included in-depth interviews with all members except Brian. Carl confided
to Callan that Brian would record again with the band at some point in the near
future.[full citation needed] A few Beach Boys sessions devoted to new Brian
Wilson compositions occurred during the mid-1990s, but they remain largely
unreleased, and the album was quickly cancelled because of personal conflicts.
In February 1996, the Beach Boys guested with Status Quo on a re-recording of
"Fun, Fun, Fun", which became a British Top-30 hit.[citation needed] In June,
the group worked with comedian Jeff Foxworthy on the recording Howdy From Maui,
and eventually released Stars and Stripes Vol. 1 in August 1996. The album
consisted of country renditions of several Beach Boys hits, performed by popular
country artists such as Toby Keith and Willie Nelson. Brian, who was in a better
mental state at the time, acted as co-producer.

In early 1997, Carl was diagnosed with lung cancer and brain cancer after years
of heavy smoking. Despite his terminal condition, Carl continued to perform with
the band on its 1997 summer tour while undergoing chemotherapy. During
performances, he sat on a stool and needed oxygen after every song. However,
Carl was able to stand when he played on "God Only Knows".[citation needed] Carl
died on February 6, 1998, two months after the death of the Wilsons' mother,
Audree, leaving Brian, Jardine and Love as the three remaining original members.

Following Carl's death, the remaining members splintered. Love, Johnston and
former guitarist Marks continued to tour without Jardine, initially as
"America's Band", but following several cancelled bookings under that name, they
sought authorization through Brother Records Inc. (BRI) to tour as "The Beach
Boys" and secured the necessary license.[citation needed] In turn, Jardine began
to tour regularly with his band dubbed "Beach Boys: Family & Friends" until he
ran into legal issues for using the name without license. Meanwhile, Jardine
sued Love, claiming that he had been excluded from their concerts. BRI, through
its longtime attorney, Ed McPherson, sued Jardine in Federal Court. Jardine, in
turn, counter-claimed against BRI for wrongful termination. BRI ultimately
prevailed after several years. Love was allowed to continue to tour as "The
Beach Boys".[citation needed]

Released from Landy's control, Brian Wilson sought different treatments for his
illnesses that aided him in his solo career. He toured regularly with his
backing band consisting of members of Wondermints and other LA/Chicago
musicians. Marks also maintained a solo career. The surviving group members
appeared as themselves for the 1998 documentary film Endless Harmony: The Beach
Boys Story, directed by Alan Boyd. Following the success of 1997's The Pet
Sounds Sessions, many compilations were then issued by Capitol containing new
archival material: Endless Harmony Soundtrack (1998), Ultimate Christmas (1998),
and Hawthorne, CA (2001).

In 2004, Wilson recorded and released his solo album Brian Wilson Presents
Smile, a reinterpretation of the Smile project that he initiated with the Beach
Boys thirty-six years earlier. That September, Wilson issued a free CD through
the Mail On Sunday that included Beach Boys songs he had recently rerecorded,
five of which he co-authored with Love. The 10 track compilation had 2.6 million
copies distributed and prompted Love to file a lawsuit in November 2005; he
claimed the promotion hurt the sales of the original recordings. Love's suit was
dismissed in 2007 when a judge determined that there were no triable issues.

On June 13, 2006, the five surviving Beach Boys (Wilson, Love, Jardine,
Johnston, and Marks) appeared together for the celebration of the 40th
anniversary of Pet Sounds and the double-platinum certification of their
greatest hits compilation, Sounds of Summer: The Very Best of The Beach Boys, in
a ceremony atop the Capitol Records building in Hollywood. Plaques were awarded
for their efforts, with Wilson accepting on behalf of Dennis and Carl.
Throughout the year, it was rumored that the band would reform to perform the
Pet Sounds album live in its entirety in November. Ultimately, Wilson began a
brief Pet Sounds tour with Jardine and no other group members.

On October 31, 2011, the Beach Boys released surviving 1960s recordings from
Smile in the form of The Smile Sessions. The album – even in its incomplete form
– garnered universal critical acclaim and experienced popular success, charting
in both the Billboard US and UK Top 30. The band was rewarded with glowing
reviews, including inclusion in Rolling Stone's Top 500 album list at No. 381.
The Smile Sessions went on to win Best Historical Album at the 2013 Grammy
Awards.

In February 2011, the Beach Boys released "Don't Fight the Sea", a charity
single to aid the victims of the 2011 Japan earthquake. The single, released on
Jardine's 2011 album A Postcard From California featured Jardine, Wilson, Love
and Johnston.[citation needed]

On December 16, 2011, it was announced that Wilson, Love, Jardine, Johnston and
Marks would reunite for a new album and 50th anniversary tour in 2012 to include
a performance at the New Orleans Jazz Festival in April 2012. On February 12,
2012, the Beach Boys performed at the 2012 Grammy Awards, in what was billed as
a "special performance" by organizers. It marked the group's first live
performance to include Brian since 1996. The Beach Boys then appeared at the
April 10, 2012, season opener for the Los Angeles Dodgers and performed "Surfer
Girl" and "The Star-Spangled Banner". In April, the new album's title was
revealed as That's Why God Made the Radio. The first single from the album, the
title track, made its national radio debut April 25, 2012, on ESPN's Mike and
Mike in the Morning[not in citation given] and was released on iTunes and other
digital platforms on April 26. That's Why God Made the Radio debuted at No. 3 on
U.S. charts, making U.S. chart history by expanding the group's span of
Billboard 200 top ten albums across 49 years and one week, passing the Beatles
with 47 years of top ten albums.

Later in 2012, the group released the Fifty Big Ones and Greatest Hits
compilations along with reissues of 12 of their albums. The next year, the group
released Live – The 50th Anniversary Tour a 41 song, 2-CD set documenting their
50th Anniversary Tour. While there were no definite plans, Brian stated that he
would like to make another Beach Boys album following the world tour. In August
2013, the group released Made in California, a six disc collection featuring
more than seven and a half hours of music, including more than 60 previously
unreleased tracks, and concluding the Beach Boys' 50th anniversary
campaign.[citation needed]

Love says that on June 1, 2012, he received an e-mail from Wilson's wife and
manager Melinda Ledbetter stating "no more shows for Wilson". Love, who is
obligated by his license of the Beach Boys name to maintain revenue flow to
Brother Records, then began accepting invitations for when the reunion was over.
On June 25, Ledbetter sent another e-mail asking to disregard her last message,
but by then, Love says, "it was too late. We had booked other concerts, and
promoters had begun selling tickets." The next day, Love announced additional
touring dates that would not feature Wilson. Wilson then denied knowledge of
these new dates. Love writes: "I had wanted to send out a joint press release,
between Brian and me, formally announcing the end of the reunion tour on
September 28. But I couldn’t get Brian’s management team on board (Brian himself
doesn’t make those kinds of decisions)."

In late September, news outlets began reporting that Love had dismissed Wilson
from the Beach Boys. On October 5, Love responded in a self-written press
release to the LA Times that the band would return to its pre-50th Reunion Tour
lineup with him and Johnston touring as the Beach Boys without Wilson, Jardine,
and Marks:

Four days later, Wilson and Jardine submitted a written response to the rumors
stating: "After Mike booked a couple of shows with Bruce, Al and I were, of
course, disappointed. Then there was confusion in some markets when photos of
me, Al and David and the 50th reunion band appeared on websites advertising his
shows ... I was completely blindsided by his press release ... We hadn't even
discussed as a band what we were going to do with all the offers that were
coming in for more 50th shows." Love accused Wilson's statements in this press
release to be falsified by his agents, again affirming that the presupposed
agreements were "well-documented", and that Wilson had halted further touring
dates. On December 13, Wilson and Jardine played a Christmas show at which they
performed the Beach Boys Christmas songs. Following this appearance, Wilson
announced concert dates featuring himself, Jardine and Marks. Love and Johnston
continued to perform under the Beach Boys name, while Wilson, Jardine, and Marks
continued to tour as a trio, and a subsequent tour with guitarist Jeff Beck also
included former Beach Boy Blondie Chaplin at select dates.[citation needed]
Reflecting upon the band's reunion in 2013, Love stated: "I had a wonderful
experience being in the studio together. Brian has lost none of his ability to
structure those melodies and chord progressions, and when we heard us singing
together coming back over the speakers it sounded like 1965 again. Touring was
more for the fans. ... It was a great experience, it had a term to it, and now
everyone's going on with their ways of doing things."

Biographer Jon Stebbins speculated that Love declined to continue working with
the group because of the lesser control he had over the touring process, coupled
with the lower financial gain, noting: "Night after night after night after
night, Mike is making less money getting reminded that Brian is more popular
than him. And he has to answer to people instead of calling all the shots
himself." Writer Stacey Anderson called Love's arguments "wholly unconvincing",
facetiously summarizing: "He insists that the larger ensemble with Wilson would
have overpowered the modest venues he’d already booked; as anyone can infer,
this really means he would have lost money by including Wilson."

Jardine, Marks, Johnston and Love appeared together at the 2014 Ella Awards
Ceremony, where Love was honored for his work as a singer. Marks sang "409" in
honor of Love, and Jardine performed "Help Me Rhonda". They closed the show with
"Fun, Fun, Fun". Wilson's long time band associate Jeff Foskett also appeared,
but not Wilson. On May 15, 2014 the touring Beach Boys (Love and Johnston)
announced a tour celebrating "50 Years of 'Fun Fun Fun'", named for their 1964
single. The tour featured the addition of Foskett, who replaced Mike's son
Christian. Foskett left Wilson's band because of encumbering responsibilities,
and hopes that Wilson and Love's band would someday converge, believing that the
two Beach Boys do not "personally have a problem with each other." As of
September 2014, Jardine has maintained that a continued reunion with the Beach
Boys is "really up to him [Love] ... He claims he didn't, that he fired us after
the reunion ... He’s a brilliant songwriter, and unfortunately he has brilliant
lawyers. We wish him all the best, but doggonit, you know, we’d like to be Beach
Boys, too. There you go."

In 2015, Soundstage aired an episode featuring Wilson performing with Jardine
and former Beach Boys Blondie Chaplin and Ricky Fataar at The Venetian in Las
Vegas. In April 2015, when asked if he was interested in making music with Love
again, Wilson replied: "I don’t think so, no," later adding in July that he
"doesn't talk to the Beach Boys [or] Mike Love." On July 25, Love said: "If you
get Brian and I, we might go to the piano. But with every band there are cliques
that are formed with management, wives, agents, publicists – and the tendency is
with some people is they tend to lionize or make one person more important than
the others. ... the Beach Boys and all these bands that ever existed are a team.
I learned as captain of my cross country team that you don't put a person down
to get their best efforts, you encourage them."

In Understanding Rock: Essays in Musical Analysis, music theorist Daniel
Harrison summarizes:

The Beach Boys began as a garage band playing 1950s style rock and roll,
reassembling styles of music such as surf to include vocal jazz harmony, which
created their unique sound. In addition, they introduced their signature
approach to common genres such as the pop ballad by applying harmonic or formal
twists not native to rock and roll. Early on, Love sang lead vocals in the
rock-oriented songs, while Carl contributed crisp guitar lines on the group's
ballads. Miller observed, "On straight rockers they sang tight harmonies behind
Love's lead ... on ballads, Brian played his falsetto off against lush,
jazz-tinged voicings, often using (for rock) unorthodox harmonic structures."
Harrison adds, "But even the least distinguished of the Beach Boys' early
uptempo rock 'n' roll songs show traces of structural complexity at some level;
Brian was simply too curious and experimental to leave convention alone." This
new sound was quickly associated with the Modernism movement blooming in the Los
Angeles music scene. Among the distinct elements of the Beach Boys' style were
the nasal quality of their singing voices, their use of a falsetto harmony over
a driving, locomotive-like melody, and the sudden chiming in of the whole group
on a key line.

During their early years, the Beach Boys released music that displayed an
increasing level of sophistication, a period where Brian Wilson consistently
acted as the group's primary bandleader, songwriter, producer, and arranger for
the group's most commercially and critically successful work. In a 1966 article
that asks "Do the Beach Boys rely too much on sound genius Brian?" Carl
responded that every member of the group contributes ideas, but admitted that
Brian was majorly responsible for their music. In 1967, Dennis was cited as "the
closest to brother Brian's own musical ideals ... He always emphasises the
fusion, in their work, of pop and classical music." An appearance by the band on
Good Morning America in 1980 was highlighted by journalist Ben Ratliff who
explains: "The clip and everything about it – the occasion for its happening,
Dennis's shrug, Al Jardine's silence, Carl's gameness, Brian's self-absorption,
Mike Love's critical stewardship of the narrative – seems to say a lot, in seven
minutes, about who the Beach Boys are and how they worked together."

In early 1964, Brian began his breakaway from beach-themed music. Later in
November of the same year, the group expressed desires to advance from the surf
rock style for which they initially became known for. New York magazine would
later refer to the albums Pet Sounds and Smiley Smile as their "experimental pop
phase". The band went on to incorporate many more genres, from baroque pop to
psychedelia and synthpop.

The band's earliest influences came primarily from the work of Chuck Berry[nb 8]
and the Four Freshmen. Performed by the Four Freshmen, "Their Hearts Were Full
of Spring" (1961) was a particular favorite of the group. By deconstructing
their arrangements of pop standards, Brian educated himself on jazz harmony.
Taking this into mind, Philip Lambert noted, "If Bob Flanigan helped teach Brian
how to sing, then Gershwin, Kern, Porter, and the other members of this pantheon
helped him learn how to craft a song." Other general influences on the group
included the Hi-Los,[nb 9] the Penguins, the Robins, Bill Haley & His Comets,
Otis Williams, the Cadets, the Everly Brothers, the Shirelles, the Regents, and
the Crystals.[nb 10]

Carl remembers: "Most of [Mike's] classmates were black. He was the only white
guy on his track team. He was really immersed in doo-wop and that music and I
think he influenced Brian to listen to it. The black artists were so much better
in terms of rock records in those days that the white records almost sounded
like put-ons." Their eclectic mix of white and black vocal groups – ranging from
the rock and roll of Berry, the jazz harmonies of the Four Freshmen, the pop of
the Four Preps, the folk of the Kingston Trio, the R&B of groups like the
Coasters and the Five Satins, and the doo wop of Dion and the Belmonts – helped
contribute to the Beach Boys' uniqueness in American popular music. While the
Beach Boys are not often associated with blues, Brian has called this a
misapprehension, citing Smokey Robinson and Stevie Wonder as influences.
Regarding surf rock pioneer Dick Dale, Brian clarified that his influence on the
group was limited to Carl and his style of guitar playing. Carl himself named
Berry, the Ventures, and John Walker for shaping his guitar style, and that the
Beach Boys had learned to play all of the Ventures' songs by ear early in their
career. On Jimi Hendrix and "heavy" music, Brian said he felt no pressure to go
in that direction: "We never got into the heavy musical level trip. We never
needed to. It's already been done."

The influence of the Beach Boys' peers combined with Brian's competitive nature
drove him to reach higher creative peaks.[nb 11] Sometime around late 1963, he
heard the song "Be My Baby" (1963) by the Ronettes for the first time, revamping
his creative interests and songwriting. "Be My Baby" is considered the epitome
of Phil Spector's Wall of Sound production technique, a recording method that
fascinated Wilson for the next several decades. Brian later reflected: "I was
unable to really think as a producer up until the time where I really got
familiar with Phil Spector's work. That was when I started to design the
experience to be a record rather than just a song."[nb 12] Other prominent
inspirations for Brian included Gershwin's "Rhapsody in Blue" (1924), the
Beatles' Rubber Soul (1965), and composer Burt Bacharach. Brian is quoted: "Burt
Bacharach and Hal David are more like me. They’re also the best pop team – per
se – today. As a producer, Bacharach has a very fresh, new approach."[nb 13]

Experimentation with psychotropic substances proved pivotal to the group's
development as artists. In December 1964, Brian was introduced to cannabis
before quickly progressing to LSD in early 1965. Of his first acid trip, Brian
recalled that the drug had subjected him to "a very religious experience" which
enlightened him to indescribable philosophies. The music for "California Girls"
(the first Beach Boys song Bruce Johnston participated in) came from this first
LSD experience, as did much of the group's subsequent work where they would
partake in drug use during recording sessions.

The band members often reflected on the spiritual nature of their music (and
music in general), particularly for the recording of Pet Sounds and Smile. Even
though the Wilson family did not grow up in a particularly religious household,
Carl was described as "the most truly religious person I know" by Brian, and
Carl was forthcoming about the group's spiritual beliefs stating: "We believe in
God as a kind of universal consciousness. God is love. God is you. God is me.
God is everything right here in this room. It's a spiritual concept which
inspires a great deal of our music." Carl told Rave magazine in 1967 that the
group's influences are of a "religious nature", but not any religion in
specific, only "an idea based upon that of Universal Consciousness. ... The
spiritual concept of happiness and doing good to others is extremely important
to the lyric of our songs, and the religious element of some of the better
church music is also contained within some of our new work."

Brian is quoted during the Smile era: "I'm very religious. Not in the sense of
churches, going to church; but like the essence of all religion." During the
recording of Pet Sounds, Brian held prayer meetings, later reflecting that "God
was with us the whole time we were doing [the] album ... I could feel that
feeling in my brain." In 1966, he explained that he wanted to move into a white
spiritual sound, and predicted that the rest of the music industry would follow
suit. In 2011, Brian maintained the spirituality was important to his music, and
that he did not follow any particular religion.

The Beach Boys included an interpretation of "The Lord's Prayer" as the B-side
to their 1963 "Little Saint Nick" single. Brian expressed apprehensiveness over
naming his song "God Only Knows" because, in the 1960s, references to God in pop
music were largely unheard of. Carl said that Smile was chosen as an album title
because of its connection to the group's spiritual beliefs. Brian referred to
Smile as his "teenage symphony to God", composing a hymn, "Our Prayer", as the
album's opening spiritual invocation. He spoke of his LSD trips as a "religious
experience", and during a session for "Our Prayer", Brian can be heard asking
the other Beach Boys: "Do you guys feel any acid yet?". In 1968, Mike Love's
interest in transcendental meditation led the Beach Boys to record the original
song "Transcendental Meditation".

Brian identified each member individually for their vocal range, once detailing
the ranges for Carl, Dennis, Jardine ("[they] progress upwards through G, A, and
B"), Love ("can go from bass to the E above middle C"), and himself ("I can take
the second D in the treble clef").[nb 14] He declared in 1966 that his greatest
interest was to expand modern vocal harmony, owing his fascination with voice to
the Four Freshmen, which he considered a "groovy sectional sound." He added,
"The harmonies that we are able to produce give us a uniqueness which is really
the only important thing you can put into records – some quality that no one
else has got. I love peaks in a song – and enhancing them on the control panel.
Most of all, I love the human voice for its own sake." For a period, Brian
avoided singing falsetto for the group, saying "I thought people thought I was a
fairy. ... The band told me, 'If that's the way you sing, don't worry about
it.'"

Rock critic Erik Davis wrote, "The 'purity' of tone and genetic proximity that
smoothed their voices was almost creepy, pseudo-castrato, [and] a 'barbershop'
sound." According to Brian: "Jack Good once told us, 'You sing like eunuchs in a
Sistine Chapel,' which was a pretty good quote." Writer Richard Goldstein
reported that, according to a fellow journalist who asked Brian about the black
roots of his music, Brian's response was: "We're white and we sing white."
Goldstein added that when he asked where his approach to vocal harmonies had
derived from, Wilson answered: 'Barbershop'." On the group's blend, Carl said:
"Michael has a beautifully rich, very full-sounding bass voice. Yet his lead
singing is real nasal, real punk. Alan’s voice has a bright timbre to it; it
really cuts. My voice has a kind of calm sound. We’re big oooh-ers; we love to
oooh. It’s a big, full sound, that’s very pleasing to us; it opens up the
heart."

From lowest intervals to highest, the group's vocal harmony stack usually began
with Love or Dennis, followed by Jardine or Carl, and finally Brian on top,
according to Jardine, while Carl said that the blend was Love on bottom, Carl
above, followed by Dennis or Jardine, and then Brian on top. Jardine explains,
"We always sang the same vocal intervals. ... As soon as we heard the chords on
the piano we’d figure it out pretty easily. If there was a vocal move [Brian]
envisioned, he’d show that particular singer that move. We had somewhat
photographic memory as far as the vocal parts were concerned so that [was] never
a problem for us."

Striving for absolute perfection, Brian's intricate vocal arrangements exercised
the group's calculated blend of intonation, attack, phrasing, and expression.
Sometimes, he would sing each vocal harmony part alone through multi-track tape.
Jimmy Webb has said, "They used very little vibrato and sing in very straight
tones. The voices all lie down beside each other very easily – there's no
bumping between them because the pitch is very precise."

The group's instrumental combo initially involved Brian on bass guitar and
keyboards, Carl on guitar, and Dennis on drums. Nine months after forming, they
acquired national success, and demand for their personal appearance skyrocketed.
Biographer James Murphy said, "By most contemporary accounts, they were not a
very good live band when they started. ... The Beach Boys learned to play as a
band in front of live audiences", but asserted that they eventually became "one
of the best and enduring live bands".

For the recording of the Beach Boys' instrumental tracks, Brian arranged many of
his compositions for a conglomerate of session musicians informally known as the
Wrecking Crew. Their assistance was needed because of the increasingly
complicated nature of the material.[nb 15] As a result, a number of songs do not
credit the Beach Boys as instrumentalists, but nearly invariably as lead,
harmony, or backing vocalists.[citation needed] It's the belief of Richie
Unterberger that, "Before session musicians took over most of the parts, the
Beach Boys could play respectably gutsy surf rock as a self-contained unit."

Carl continued to play beside these musicians whenever he was available to
attend sessions. In archivist Craig Slowinski's view, "One should not sell short
Carl's own contributions; the youngest Wilson had developed as a musician
sufficiently to play alongside the horde of high-dollar session pros that big
brother was now bringing into the studio. Carl's guitar playing [was] a key
ingredient."

It is often erroneously stated that Dennis' drumming in the Beach Boys'
recordings was filled in exclusively by studio musicians. His drumming is
documented on a number of the group's singles, including "I Get Around", "Fun,
Fun Fun", and "Don't Worry Baby".

Brian's experiments with his Wollensak tape recorder provide early examples of
his flair for exotica and unusual percussive patterns and arranging ideas that
he would recycle in later prominent work. Through attending Phil Spector's
sessions sporadically, Brian learned how to act as a producer for records while
being educated on the Wall of Sound process. From then on, Brian received some
production advice from Jan Berry. As they collaborated on several hit singles
written and produced for other artists, they recorded what would later be
regarded the California Sound. The positive commercial response to Brian's
structurally irregular and harmonically varied pop compositions gave him the
prestige, resources, and courage to further his creative aspirations. He
proceeded to explore many unusual combinations of instruments while emphasizing
inventive percussion[nb 16] and progressively ambitious lyricism.

Although he was often dubbed a perfectionist, Brian was an inexperienced
musician, and his understanding was mostly self-taught. He handled most stages
of the group's recording process from the beginning, despite Nik Venet being
credited for producing their early recordings. At the lyric stage, Brian usually
worked with bandmate Mike Love, whose assertive persona provided youthful
swagger that contrasted Brian's explorations in romanticism and sensitivity.
Luis Sanchez noted a pattern where Brian would spare surfing imagery when
working with collaborators outside of his band's circle, in the examples "Lonely
Sea" and "In My Room".

Foreshadowed by Beach Boys' Party! (1965), much of the group's recordings from
1967 to 1970 displayed sparse instrumentation, a more relaxed ensemble, and a
seeming inattention to production quality. Brian briefly experimented with
musique concrete and minimalist rock approaches to music before retreating to
his home recording studio to record "manic" material in the 1970s, enacting
syncopated exercises and counterpoints layered on jittery eighth note tone
clusters and loping shuffle grooves. During the infancy of Brian's home studio,
the group was forced to improvise many technical aspects of recording. In one
instance, they used an empty swimming pool as an echo chamber.[page needed]

When Brian abdicated from the group, the other members were forced to take a
more active production role. This is believed to have faltered the quality of
their music. Richie Unterberger believes that after the December 1967 release of
Wild Honey, "the Beach Boys were revealed as a group that, although capable of
producing some fine and interesting music, were no longer innovators on the
level of the Beatles and other figureheads." The album marked the beginning of
Carl's increased role as producer, who described it as "music for Brian to cool
out by", signaling a mellower approach that pervaded into the 1970s. In 1968,
Dennis contributed original songs to Friends, revealing himself as a broodingly
soulful songwriter and singer, while Bruce Johnston devised a moody
instrumental, "The Nearest Faraway Place", for 20/20 the following year.

Sunflower (1970) marked an end to the experimental songwriting and production
phase initiated by Smiley Smile (1967). Of the albums between Surf's Up (1971)
and Holland (1973), Daniel Harrison wrote that they "contain a mixture of
middle-of-the-road music entirely consonant with pop style during the early
1970s with a few oddities that proved that the desire to push beyond
conventional boundaries was not dead." While Harrison adamantly states "1974 is
the year in which the Beach Boys ceased to be a rock 'n' roll act and became an
oldies act," Love You (1977) is perceived by some as an oddity that sounds like
no other record in their catalog with synthesizer-laden arrangements played
almost entirely by Brian.

Regarded by some critics as one of the greatest American rock groups and an
important catalyst in the evolution of popular music, the Beach Boys are one of
the most critically acclaimed, commercially successful, and widely influential
bands of all time. The Beach Boys' sales estimates range from 100 to 350 million
records worldwide, and have influenced artists spanning many genres and decades.
The group's early songs made them major pop stars in the US, the UK, Australia
and other countries, having seven top 10 singles between April 1963 and November
1964. They were one of the few American bands formed prior to the 1964 British
Invasion to continue their success. Among artists of the 1960s, they are one of
few central figures in the histories of rock.

The group routinely appears in the upper reaches of ranked lists such as "The
Top 1000 Albums of All Time." Many of the group's songs and albums including The
Beach Boys Today! (1965), Smiley Smile (1967), Sunflower (1970), and Surf's Up
(1971) are featured in several lists devoted to the greatest of all time. The
1966 releases Pet Sounds and Good Vibrations frequently rank among the top of
critics' lists of the greatest albums and singles of all time. In 2004, Pet
Sounds was preserved in the National Recording Registry by the Library of
Congress for being "culturally, historically, and aesthetically significant."
Their recordings of "In My Room", "Good Vibrations", "California Girls" and the
entire Pet Sounds album have been inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame. On
Acclaimed Music, "Good Vibrations" is ranked the third best song of all time,
while "God Only Knows" is ranked twenty-first; the group itself is ranked eleven
in its 1000 most recommended artists of all time.

In 1966, a reader poll conducted by the UK magazine NME crowned the Beach Boys
as the world's number-one vocal group, ahead of the Beatles and the Rolling
Stones. In 1974, the Beach Boys were awarded "Band of the Year" by Rolling
Stone. On December 30, 1980, the Beach Boys were awarded a star on the Hollywood
Walk of Fame, located at 1500 Vine Street. The group was inducted into the Rock
and Roll Hall of Fame in 1988. Ten years later they were selected for the Vocal
Group Hall of Fame. In 2001, the group received a Grammy Lifetime Achievement
Award. In 2004, Rolling Stone ranked the Beach Boys No. 12 on its list of the
100 Greatest Artists of All Time. Brian Wilson was inducted into the UK Rock and
Roll Hall of Fame in November 2006.

The Wilsons' California house, where the Wilson brothers grew up and the group
began, was demolished in 1986 to make way for Interstate 105, the Century
Freeway. A Beach Boys Historic Landmark (California Landmark No. 1041 at 3701
West 119th Street), dedicated on May 20, 2005, marks the location.

The Beach Boys appear as performers in the beach party films The Girls on the
Beach (1965) and The Monkey's Uncle (1965). They have also made cameo
appearances in the television series Full House (1988–1992), Home Improvement
(1993), and Baywatch (1995).[citation needed]

The life of the Beach Boys is the subject of two made-for-television films:
Summer Dreams: The Story of the Beach Boys (1990) and The Beach Boys: An
American Family (2000). Love & Mercy is a 2014 biopic that dramatizes Brian
Wilson during his time with the Beach Boys.[citation needed]



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iran

Iran (/ɪˈrɑːn/ , also /ɪˈræn/; Persian: ایران‎‎ Irān [ʔiːˈɾɒːn] ), also known as
Persia (/ˈpɜːrʒə/), officially the Islamic Republic of Iran (جمهوری اسلامی ایران
Jomhuri-ye Eslāmi-ye Irān [d͡ʒomhuːˌɾiːje eslɒːˌmiːje ʔiːˈɾɒːn]), is a sovereign
state in Western Asia. It is bordered to the northwest by Armenia, the de facto
Nagorno-Karabakh Republic, and Azerbaijan; to the north by the Caspian Sea; to
the northeast by Turkmenistan; to the east by Afghanistan and Pakistan; to the
south by the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman; and to the west by Turkey and
Iraq. Comprising a land area of 1,648,195 km2 (636,372 sq mi), it is the
second-largest country in the Middle East and the 18th-largest in the world.
With 82.8 million inhabitants, Iran is the world's 17th-most-populous country.
It is the only country with both a Caspian Sea and an Indian Ocean coastline.
The country's central location in Eurasia and Western Asia, and its proximity to
the Strait of Hormuz, make it of great geostrategic importance. Tehran is the
country's capital and largest city, as well as its leading economic and cultural
center.

Iran is the site of to one of the world's oldest civilizations, beginning with
the formation of the Proto-Elamite and Elamite kingdoms in 3200–2800 BC. The
area was first unified by the Iranian Medes in 625 BC, who became the dominant
cultural and political power in the region. Iran reached its greatest geographic
extent during the Achaemenid Empire founded by Cyrus the Great in 550 BC, which
at one time stretched from parts of Eastern Europe in the west, to the Indus
Valley in the east, making it the largest empire the world had yet seen. The
empire collapsed in 330 BC following the conquests of Alexander the Great, but
reemerged shortly after as the Parthian Empire. Under the Sassanid Dynasty, Iran
again became one of the leading powers in the world for the next four centuries.

Beginning in 633 AD, Arabs conquered Iran and largely displaced the indigenous
faiths of Manichaeism and Zoroastrianism by Islam. Iran became a major
contributor to the Islamic Golden Age that followed, producing many influential
scientists, scholars, artists, and thinkers. The rise of the Safavid Dynasty in
1501 led to the establishment of Twelver Shia Islam as the official religion of
Iran, marking one of the most important turning points in Iranian and Muslim
history. During the 18th century, Iran reached its greatest territorial extent
since the Sassanid Empire, and under Nader Shah briefly possessed what was
arguably the most powerful empire at the time. Through the late 18th and 19th
centuries, a series of conflicts with Russia led to significant territorial
losses and the erosion of sovereignty. Popular unrest culminated in the Persian
Constitutional Revolution of 1906, which established a constitutional monarchy
and the country's first legislative body, the Majles. Following a coup d'état
instigated by the U.K. and the U.S. in 1953, Iran gradually became closely
aligned with the West but grew increasingly autocratic. Growing dissent against
foreign influence and political repression led to the 1979 Revolution and the
establishment of an Islamic republic.

Iran is a major regional and middle power, and its large reserves of fossil
fuels — which include the largest natural gas supply in the world and the
fourth-largest proven oil reserves — exert considerable influence in
international energy security and the world economy. Iran's rich cultural legacy
is reflected in part by its 21 UNESCO World Heritage Sites, the third-largest
number in Asia and 11th-largest in the world.

Iran is a founding member of the UN, ECO, NAM, OIC, and OPEC. Its political
system is based on the 1979 Constitution which combines elements of a
parliamentary democracy with a theocracy governed by Islamic jurists under the
concept of a Supreme Leadership. A multicultural country comprising numerous
ethnic and linguistic groups, most inhabitants are Shia Muslims and Persian is
the official language.

The term Iran derives directly from Middle Persian Ērān, first attested in a
3rd-century inscription at Rustam Relief, with the accompanying Parthian
inscription using the term Aryān, in reference to Iranians. The Middle Iranian
ērān and aryān are oblique plural forms of gentilic ēr- (Middle Persian) and
ary- (Parthian), both deriving from Proto-Iranian *arya- (meaning "Aryan", i.e.
"of the Iranians"), argued to descend from Proto-Indo-European *ar-yo-, meaning
"skillful assembler". In the Iranian languages, the gentilic is attested as a
self-identifier included in ancient inscriptions and the literature of
Avesta,[a] and remains also in other Iranian ethnic names such as Alans
(Ossetic: Ир – Ir) and Iron (Ossetic: Ирон – Iron).

Historically, Iran has been referred to as Persia by the West, due mainly to the
writings of Greek historians who called Iran Persis (Greek: Περσίς), meaning
"land of the Persians". As the most extensive interactions the Ancient Greeks
had with any outsider was with the Persians, the term persisted, even long after
the Persian rule in Greece. However, Persis (Old Persian: Pārśa; Modern Persian:
Pārse) was originally referred to a region settled by Persians in the west shore
of Lake Urmia, in the 9th century BC. The settlement was then shifted to the
southern end of the Zagros Mountains, and is today defined as Fars Province.

In 1935, Reza Shah requested the international community to refer to the country
by its native name, Iran. As the New York Times explained at the time, "At the
suggestion of the Persian Legation in Berlin, the Tehran government, on the
Persian New Year, Nowruz, March 21, 1935, substituted Iran for Persia as the
official name of the country." Opposition to the name change led to the reversal
of the decision, and Professor Ehsan Yarshater, editor of Encyclopædia Iranica,
propagated a move to use Persia and Iran interchangeably. Today, both Persia and
Iran are used in cultural contexts; although, Iran is the name used officially
in political contexts.

Historical and cultural usage of the word Iran is not restricted to the modern
state proper. "Greater Iran" (Irānzamīn or Irān e Bozorg) correspond to
territories of the Iranian cultural and linguistic zones. In addition to modern
Iran, it includes portions of the Caucasus, Mesopotamia, Anatolia, and Central
Asia.

The Persian pronunciation of Iran is [ʔiːˈɾɒːn]. Two common pronunciations of
Iran in English are roughly “ih-RAHN” and “ih-RANN” which are listed in the
Oxford English Dictionary as /ɪˈrɑːn/ and /ɪˈran/, Merriam-Webster's Online
Dictionary as \i-ˈrän, -ˈran; ī-ˈran\, and the Random House Dictionary as
/i-ran', i-rän', ī-ran'/. The Cambridge Dictionary lists /ɪˈrɑːn/ as UK
pronunciation and /ɪˈræn/ as US pronunciation. Other dictionary is the Collins
Dictionary that lists the pronunciation as /ɪˈrɑːn/. The pronunciation guide
from the Voice of America provides the pronunciation of Iran as /ih-RAHN/. The
pronunciation /aɪˈræn/ or /eye-RANN/ is sometimes heard in U.S. media. According
to an article in The Washington Post, the correct pronunciation of Iran is
/ee-RON/ while /EYE-ran/ is listed as the way it's NOT pronounced. The American
Heritage Dictionary of the English Language in the dictionary's 2014 Usage
Ballot addressed the topic of the pronunciations of Iran and Iraq. According to
this study, among three pronunciations for Iran in American English i.e. roughly
“ih-RAHN,” “ih-RANN,” and “eye-RANN”, first two pronunciations were almost
equally acceptable while “ih-RAHN” being the preferred pronunciation for most
panelists participating in the ballot by more than four to one. With regard to
the “eye-RANN” pronunciations, however, more than 70% of the Panelists deemed
“eye-RANN” unacceptable. Among the reasons given by those Panelists who
disapprove of “eye-RANN” were that it has “hawkish connotations” and sounds
“angrier,” “xenophobic,” “ignorant,” and “not … cosmopolitan.”

The earliest archaeological artifacts in Iran, like those excavated at the
Kashafrud and Ganj Par sites, attest to a human presence in Iran since the Lower
Paleolithic era, c. 800,000–200,000 BC. Iran's Neanderthal artifacts from the
Middle Paleolithic period, c. 200,000–40,000 BC, have been found mainly in the
Zagros region, at sites such as Warwasi and Yafteh Cave.[page needed] Around
10th to 8th millennium BC, early agricultural communities such as Chogha Golan
and Chogha Bonut began to flourish in Iran, as well as Susa and Chogha Mish
developing in and around the Zagros region.[page needed]

The emergence of Susa as a city, as determined by radiocarbon dating, dates back
to early 4,395 BC. There are dozens of prehistoric sites across the Iranian
plateau, pointing to the existence of ancient cultures and urban settlements in
the 4th millennium BC. During the Bronze Age, Iran was home to several
civilizations including Elam, Jiroft, and Zayande River. Elam, the most
prominent of these civilizations, developed in the southwest of Iran, alongside
those in Mesopotamia. The emergence of writing in Elam was paralleled to Sumer,
and the Elamite cuneiform was developed since the 3rd millennium BC.

The Elamite Kingdom continued its existence until the emergence of the Median
and Achaemenid empires. Between 3400 BC until about 2000 BC, northwestern Iran
was part of the Kura-Araxes culture that stretched into the neighbouring regions
of the Caucasus and Anatolia. Since the earliest 2nd millennium BC, Assyrians
settled in swaths of western Iran, and incorporated the region into their
territories.[citation needed]

During the 2nd millennium BC, Proto-Iranian tribes arrived in Iran from the
Eurasian steppes, rivaling the native settlers of the country. As these tribes
dispersed into the wider area of Greater Iran and beyond, the boundaries of
modern Iran were dominated by the Persian, Median and Parthian tribes.

From the late 10th to late 7th centuries BC, the Iranian peoples, together with
the pre-Iranian kingdoms, fell under the domination of the Assyrian Empire,
based in northern Mesopotamia. Under king Cyaxares, the Medes and Persians
entered into an alliance with Nabopolassar of Babylon, as well as the Scythians
and the Cimmerians, and together they attacked the Assyrian Empire. The civil
war ravaged the Assyrian Empire between 616 BC and 605 BC, thus freeing their
respective peoples from three centuries of Assyrian rule. The unification of the
Median tribes under a single ruler in 728 BC led to the foundation of the Median
Empire which, by 612 BC, controlled the whole Iran and the eastern Anatolia.
This marked the end of the Kingdom of Urartu as well, which was subsequently
conquered and dissolved.

In 550 BC, Cyrus the Great, son of Mandane and Cambyses I, took over the Median
Empire, and founded the Achaemenid Empire by unifying other city states. The
conquest of Media was a result of what is called the Persian Revolt. The
brouhaha was initially triggered by the actions of the Median ruler Astyages,
and was quickly spread to other provinces, as they allied with the Persians.
Later conquests under Cyrus and his successors expanded the empire to include
Lydia, Babylon, Egypt, parts of the Balkans and Eastern Europe proper, as well
as the lands to the west of the Indus and Oxus rivers.

At its greatest extent, the Achaemenid Empire included the modern territories of
Iran, Azerbaijan, Armenia, Georgia, Turkey, much of the Black Sea coastal
regions, northeastern Greece and southern Bulgaria (Thrace), northern Greece and
Macedonia (Paeonia and Ancient Macedon), Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Israel,
Palestine, all significant ancient population centers of ancient Egypt as far
west as Libya, Kuwait, northern Saudi Arabia, parts of the UAE and Oman,
Pakistan, Afghanistan, and much of Central Asia, making it the first world
government and the largest empire the world had yet seen.

It is estimated that in 480 BC, 50 million people lived in the Achaemenid
Empire. The empire at its peak ruled over 44% of the world's population, the
highest such figure for any empire in history. In Greek history, the Achaemenid
Empire is considered as the antagonist of the Greek city states, for the
emancipation of slaves including the Jewish exiles in Babylon, building
infrastructures such as road and postal systems, and the use of an official
language, the Imperial Aramaic, throughout its territories. The empire had a
centralized, bureaucratic administration under the emperor, a large professional
army, and civil services, inspiring similar developments in later empires.
Furthermore, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, the Mausoleum at
Halicarnassus, was built in the empire between 353 and 350 BC.

Eventual conflict on the western borders began with the Ionian Revolt which
erupted into the Greco-Persian Wars, and continued through the first half of the
5th century BC, and ended with the Persian withdrawal from all of their European
territories in the Balkans and Eastern Europe proper.

In 334 BC, Alexander the Great invaded the Achaemenid Empire, defeating the last
Achaemenid emperor, Darius III, at the Battle of Issus. Following the premature
death of Alexander, Iran came under the control of the Hellenistic Seleucid
Empire. In the middle of the 2nd century BC, the Parthian Empire rose to become
the main power in Iran, and the century-long geopolitical arch-rivalry between
Romans and Parthians began, culminating in the Roman–Parthian Wars. The Parthian
Empire continued as a feudal monarchy for nearly five centuries, until 224 CE,
when it was succeeded by the Sassanid Empire. Together with their neighboring
arch-rival, the Roman-Byzantines, they made up the world's two most dominant
powers at the time, for over four centuries.

The Sassanids established an empire within the frontiers achieved by the
Achaemenids, with their capital at Ctesiphon. The Sassanid Empire of the Late
Antiquity is considered as one of the most influential periods of Iran, as Iran
influenced the culture of ancient Rome (and through that as far as Western
Europe), Africa, China, and India, and played a prominent role in the formation
of both European and Asian medieval art.

Most of the era of both Parthian and Sassanid empires were overshadowed by the
Roman-Persian Wars, which raged on their western borders at the Anatolia, the
western Caucasus, Mesopotamia, and the Levant, for over 700 years. These wars
exhausted both Romans and Sassanids, and led to the defeat of both at the hands
of the invading Muslim Arabs.

Several offshoots of the Achaemenids, Parthians, and Sassanids, established
eponymous dynasties and branches in Anatolia and the Caucasus, including the
Kingdom of Pontus, the Mihranids, and the Arsacid dynasties of Armenia, Iberia
(Georgia), and Caucasian Albania (present-day Azerbaijan and southern Dagestan).

The prolonged Byzantine-Sassanid Wars, most importantly the climactic
Byzantine-Sassanid War of 602-628, as well as the social conflict within the
Sassanid Empire, opened the way for an Arab invasion to Iran in the 7th century.
Initially defeated by the Arab Rashidun Caliphate, Iran came under the rule of
the Arab caliphates of Umayyad and Abbasid. The prolonged and gradual process of
the Islamization of Iran began following the conquest. Under the new Arab elite
of the Rashidun and later the Umayyad caliphates, both converted (mawali) and
non-converted (dhimmi) Iranians were discriminated against, being excluded from
the government and military, and having to pay a special tax called Jizya. Gunde
Shapur, home of the Academy of Gunde Shapur which was the most important medical
center of the world at the time, survived after the invasion, but became known
as an Islamic institute thereafter.

In 750, the Abbasids overthrew the Umayyads, due mainly to the support from the
mawali Iranians. The mawali formed the majority of the rebel army, which was led
by the Iranian general Abu Muslim. The arrival of the Abbasid Caliphs saw a
revival of Iranian culture and influence, and a move away from the imposed
Arabic customs. The role of the old Arab aristocracy was gradually replaced by
an Iranian bureaucracy.

After two centuries of the Arab rule, semi-independent and independent Iranian
kingdoms such as the Tahirids, Saffarids, Samanids, and Buyids began to appear
on the fringes of the declining Abbasid Caliphate. By the Samanid era in the 9th
and 10th centuries, the efforts of Iranians to regain their independence had
been well solidified.

The blossoming literature, philosophy, medicine, and art of Iran became major
elements in the formation of a new age for the Iranian civilization, during the
period known as the Islamic Golden Age. The Islamic Golden Age reached its peak
by the 10th and 11th centuries, during which Iran was the main theater of the
scientific activities. After the 10th century, the Persian language, alongside
Arabic, was used for the scientific, philosophical, historical, musical, and
medical works, whereas the important Iranian writers, such as Tusi, Avicenna,
Qotb od Din Shirazi, and Biruni, had major contributions in the scientific
writing.

The cultural revival that began in the Abbasid period led to a resurfacing of
the Iranian national identity, and so earlier attempts of Arabization never
succeeded in Iran. The Iranian Shuubiyah movement became a catalyst for Iranians
to regain independence in their relations with the Arab invaders. The most
notable effect of this movement was the continuation of the Persian language
attested to the epic poet Ferdowsi, now regarded as the most important figure in
Iranian literature.

The 10th century saw a mass migration of Turkic tribes from Central Asia into
the Iranian plateau. Turkic tribesmen were first used in the Abbasid army as
mamluks (slave-warriors), replacing Iranian and Arab elements within the army.
As a result, the mamluks gained a significant political power. In 999, large
portions of Iran came briefly under the rule of the Ghaznavids, whose rulers
were of mamluk Turk origin, and longer subsequently under the Turkish Seljuk and
Khwarezmian empires. These Turks had been Persianized and had adopted Persian
models of administration and rulership. The Seljuks subsequently gave rise to
the Sultanate of Rum in Anatolia, while taking their thoroughly Persianized
identity with them. The result of the adoption and patronage of Persian culture
by Turkish rulers was the development of a distinct Turko-Persian tradition.

In 1219–21 the Khwarezmian Empire suffered a devastating invasion by the Mongol
army of Genghis Khan. According to Steven R. Ward, "Mongol violence and
depredations killed up to three-fourths of the population of the Iranian
Plateau, possibly 10 to 15 million people. Some historians have estimated that
Iran's population did not again reach its pre-Mongol levels until the mid-20th
century."

Following the fracture of the Mongol Empire in 1256, Hulagu Khan, grandson of
Genghis Khan, established the Ilkhanate in Iran. In 1370, yet another conqueror,
Timur, followed the example of Hulagu, establishing the Timurid Empire which
lasted for another 156 years. In 1387, Timur ordered the complete massacre of
Isfahan, reportedly killing 70,000 citizens. The Ilkhans and the Timurids soon
came to adopt the ways and customs of the Iranians, choosing to surround
themselves with a culture that was distinctively Iranian.

By the 1500s, Ismail I from Ardabil, established the Safavid dynasty, with
Tabriz as the capital. Beginning with Azerbaijan, he subsequently extended his
authority over all of the Iranian territories, and established an intermittent
Iranian hegemony over the vast relative regions, reasserting the Iranian
identity within large parts of the Greater Iran. Iran was predominantly Sunni,
but Ismail instigated a forced conversion to the Shia branch of Islam, by which
the Shia Islam spread throughout the Safavid territories in the Caucasus, Iran,
Anatolia, and Mesopotamia. As a result, thereof, the modern-day Iran is the only
official Shia nation of the world, with it holding an absolute majority in Iran
and the Republic of Azerbaijan, having there the 1st and 2nd highest number of
Shia inhabitants by population percentage in the world.

The centuries-long geopolitical and ideological rivalry between Safavid Iran and
the neighboring Ottoman Empire, led to numerous Ottoman–Persian Wars. The
Safavid Era peaked in the reign of Abbas the Great, 1587–1629, surpassing their
Ottoman archrivals in strength, and making the empire a leading hub in Western
Eurasia for the sciences and arts. The Safavid Era saw the start of mass
integration from Caucasian populations into new layers of the society of Iran,
as well as mass resettlement of them within the heartlands of Iran, playing a
pivotal role in the history of Iran for centuries onwards. Following a gradual
decline in the late 1600s and early 1700s, which was caused by the internal
conflicts, the continuous wars with the Ottomans, and the foreign interference
(most notably the Russian interference), the Safavid rule was ended by the
Pashtun rebels who besieged Isfahan and defeated Soltan Hosein in 1722.

In 1729, Nader Shah, a chieftain and military genius from Khorasan, successfully
drove out and conquered the Pashtun invaders. He subsequently took back the
annexed Caucasian territories which were divided among the Ottoman and Russian
authorities by the ongoing chaos in Iran. During the reign of Nader Shah, Iran
reached its greatest extent since the Sassanid Empire, reestablishing the
Iranian hegemony all over the Caucasus, as well as other major parts of the west
and central Asia, and briefly possessing what was arguably the most powerful
empire at the time.

Nader Shah invaded India and sacked far off Delhi by the late 1730s. His
territorial expansion, as well as his military successes, went into a decline
following the final campaigns in the Northern Caucasus. The assassination of
Nader Shah sparked a brief period of civil war and turmoil, after which Karim
Khan of the Zand dynasty came to power in 1750, bringing a period of relative
peace and prosperity.

The geopolitical reach of the Zand dynasty was limited, compared to its
preceding dynasties. Many of the Iranian territories in the Caucasus gained de
facto independence and were locally ruled through various Caucasian khanates.
However, despite the self-ruling, they all remained subjects and vassals to the
Zand king. The khanates exercised control over their affairs via international
trade routes between Central Asia and the West.

Another civil war ensued after the death of Karim Khan in 1779, out of which Aqa
Mohammad Khan emerged, founding the Qajar dynasty in 1794. In 1795, following
the disobedience of the Georgian subjects and their alliance with the Russians,
the Qajars captured Tblisi by the Battle of Krtsanisi, and drove the Russians
out of the entire Caucasus, reestablishing the Iranian suzerainty over the
region.

The Russo-Persian wars of 1804–1813 and 1826–1828 resulted in large irrevocable
territorial losses for Iran in the Caucasus, comprising all of Transcaucasia and
Dagestan, which made part of the very concept of Iran for centuries, and thus
substantial gains for the neighboring Russian Empire.

As a result of the 19th century Russo-Persian wars, the Russians took over the
Caucasus, and Iran irrevocably lost control over its integral territories in the
region (comprising modern-day Dagestan, Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan), which
got confirmed per the treaties of Gulistan and Turkmenchay. The area to the
north of the river Aras, among which the contemporary Republic of Azerbaijan,
eastern Georgia, Dagestan, and Armenia, were Iranian territory until they were
occupied by Russia in the course of the 19th century.

As Iran shrank, many Transcaucasian and North Caucasian Muslims moved towards
Iran, especially until the aftermath result of the Caucasian War, and the
decades afterwards, while Iran's Armenians were encouraged to settle in the
newly incorporated Russian territories, causing significant demographic shifts.

Around 1.5 million people—20 to 25% of the population of Iran—died as a result
of the Great Famine of 1870–1871.

Between 1872 and 1905, a series of protests took place in response to the sale
of concessions to foreigners by Qajar monarchs Nasser ed Din and Mozaffar ed
Din, and led to the Iranian Constitutional Revolution. The first Iranian
Constitution and the first national parliament of Iran were founded in 1906,
through the ongoing revolution. The Constitution included the official
recognition of Iran's three religious minorities, namely Christians,
Zoroastrians, and Jews, which has remained a basis in the legislation of Iran
since then.

The struggle related to the constitutional movement continued until 1911, when
Mohammad Ali Shah was defeated and forced to abdicate. On the pretext of
restoring order, the Russians occupied northern Iran in 1911, and maintained a
military presence in the region for years to come. During World War I, the
British occupied much of the territory of western Iran, and fully withdrew in
1921. Also during this time, a famine in northern Iran killed between 8 and 10
million people. The Persian Campaign commenced furthermore during World War I in
northwestern Iran after an Ottoman invasion, as part of the Middle Eastern
theatre of World War I. As a result of Ottoman hostilities across the border, a
large amount of the Assyrians of Iran were massacred by the Ottoman armies,
notably in and around Urmia. Apart from the rule of Aqa Mohammad Khan, the Qajar
rule is characterized as a century of misrule.

The Persian Cossack Brigade, which was the most effective military force
available to the crown, began a military coup supported by the British in
February 1921. The Qajar dynasty was subsequently overthrown, and Reza Khan, the
former general of the Cossack Brigade, became the new Prime Minister of Iran.
Eventually, he was declared the new monarch in 1925—thence known as Reza
Shah—establishing the Pahlavi dynasty.

In the midst of World War II in 1941, Nazi Germany began the so-called Operation
Barbarossa and invaded the Soviet Union, breaking the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact.
This had a major impact on Iran, which had declared neutrality in the conflicts.
Later that year, following an Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran, Reza Shah was
forced to abdicate in favor of his son, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi. Subsequently,
Iran became a major conduit for British and American aid to the Soviet Union
until the end of the ongoing war.

At the 1943 Tehran Conference, the Allied "Big Three" (Joseph Stalin, Franklin
D. Roosevelt, and Winston Churchill) issued the Tehran Declaration to guarantee
the post-war independence and boundaries of Iran. However, at the end of the
war, Soviet troops remained in Iran and local pro-Soviet groups established two
puppet states in northwestern Iran, namely the People's Government of Azerbaijan
and the Republic of Mahabad. Receiving a promise of oil concessions, the Soviets
withdraw from Iran proper in May 1946. The two puppet states were soon
overthrown following the Iran crisis of 1946, and the oil concessions were
revoked.

In 1951, Mohammad Mosaddegh was elected as the prime minister. He became
enormously popular in Iran, after he nationalized Iran's petroleum industry and
oil reserves. He was deposed in the 1953 Iranian coup d'état, an Anglo-American
covert operation that marked the first time the US had overthrown a foreign
government during the Cold War.

After the coup, the Shah became increasingly autocratic and sultanistic, and
Iran entered a phase of decades long controversial close relations with the
United States and some other foreign governments. While the Shah increasingly
modernized Iran and claimed to retain it as a fully secular state, arbitrary
arrests and torture by his secret police, the SAVAK, were used to crush all
forms of political opposition.

Ruhollah Khomeini, a radical Muslim cleric, became an active critic of the
Shah's far-reaching series of reforms known as the White Revolution. Khomeini
publicly denounced the government, and was arrested and imprisoned for 18
months. After his release in 1964, he refused to apologize, and was eventually
sent into exile.

Due to the 1973 spike in oil prices, the economy of Iran was flooded with
foreign currency, which caused inflation. By 1974, the economy of Iran was
experiencing double digit inflation, and despite the many large projects to
modernize the country, corruption was rampant and caused large amounts of waste.
By 1975 and 1976, an economic recession led to increased unemployment,
especially among millions of youth who had migrated to the cities of Iran
looking for construction jobs during the boom years of the early 1970s. By the
late 1970s, many of these people opposed the Shah's regime and began to organize
and join the protests against it.

The 1979 Revolution, later known as the Islamic Revolution, began in January
1978 with the first major demonstrations against the Shah. After a year of
strikes and demonstrations paralyzing the country and its economy, Mohammad Reza
Pahlavi fled the country and Ruhollah Khomeini returned from exile to Tehran in
February 1979, forming a new government. After holding a referendum, Iran
officially became an Islamic republic in April 1979. A second referendum in
December 1979 approved a theocratic constitution.

The immediate nationwide uprisings against the new government began with the
1979 Kurdish rebellion and the Khuzestan uprisings, along with the uprisings in
Sistan and Baluchestan Province and other areas. Over the next several years,
these uprisings were subdued in a violent manner by the new Islamic government.
The new government began purging itself of the non-Islamist political
opposition, as well as of those Islamists who were not considered radical
enough. Although both nationalists and Marxists had initially joined with
Islamists to overthrow the Shah, tens of thousands were executed by the new
regime afterwards.

On November 4, 1979, a group of Muslim students seized the United States Embassy
and took the embassy with 52 personnel and citizens hostage, after the United
States refused to return Mohammad Reza Pahlavi to Iran to face trial in the
court of the new regime and all but certain execution. Attempts by the Jimmy
Carter administration to negotiate for the release of the hostages, and a failed
rescue attempt, helped force Carter out of office and brought Ronald Reagan to
power. On Jimmy Carter's final day in office, the last hostages were finally set
free as a result of the Algiers Accords.

The Cultural Revolution began in 1980, with an initial closure of universities
for three years, in order to perform an inspection and cleanup in the cultural
policy of the education and training system.

On September 22, 1980, the Iraqi army invaded the western Iranian province of
Khuzestan, launching the Iran–Iraq War. Although the forces of Saddam Hussein
made several early advances, by mid 1982, the Iranian forces successfully
managed to drive the Iraqi army back into Iraq. In July 1982, with Iraq thrown
on the defensive, Iran took the decision to invade Iraq and conducted countless
offensives in a bid to conquer Iraqi territory and capture cities, such as
Basra. The war continued until 1988, when the Iraqi army defeated the Iranian
forces inside Iraq and pushed the remaining Iranian troops back across the
border. Subsequently, Khomeini accepted a truce mediated by the UN. The total
Iranian casualties in the war were estimated to be 123,220–160,000 KIA, 60,711
MIA, and 11,000–16,000 civilians killed.

Following the Iran–Iraq War, in 1989, Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani and his
administration concentrated on a pragmatic pro-business policy of rebuilding and
strengthening the economy without making any dramatic break with the ideology of
the revolution. In 1997, Rafsanjani was succeeded by the moderate reformist
Mohammad Khatami, whose government attempted, unsuccessfully, to make the
country more free and democratic.

The 2005 presidential election brought conservative populist candidate, Mahmoud
Ahmadinejad, to power. During the 2009 Iranian presidential election, the
Interior Ministry announced incumbent president Ahmadinejad had won 62.63% of
the vote, while Mir-Hossein Mousavi had come in second place with 33.75%.
Allegations of large irregularities and fraud provoked the 2009 Iranian
presidential election protests, both within Iran and in major cites outside the
country.

Hassan Rouhani was elected as President of Iran on June 15, 2013, defeating
Mohammad Bagher Ghalibaf and four other candidates. The electoral victory of
Rouhani has improved the relations of Iran with other countries.

Iran has an area of 1,648,195 km2 (636,372 sq mi). Iran lies between latitudes
24° and 40° N, and longitudes 44° and 64° E. Its borders are with Azerbaijan
(611 km or 380 mi, with Azerbaijan-Naxcivan exclave, 179 km or 111 mi) and
Armenia (35 km or 22 mi) to the north-west; the Caspian Sea to the north;
Turkmenistan (992 km or 616 mi) to the north-east; Pakistan (909 km or 565 mi)
and Afghanistan (936 km or 582 mi) to the east; Turkey (499 km or 310 mi) and
Iraq (1,458 km or 906 mi) to the west; and finally the waters of the Persian
Gulf and the Gulf of Oman to the south.

Iran consists of the Iranian Plateau with the exception of the coasts of the
Caspian Sea and Khuzestan Province. It is one of the world's most mountainous
countries, its landscape dominated by rugged mountain ranges that separate
various basins or plateaux from one another. The populous western part is the
most mountainous, with ranges such as the Caucasus, Zagros and Alborz Mountains;
the last contains Iran's highest point, Mount Damavand at 5,610 m (18,406 ft),
which is also the highest mountain on the Eurasian landmass west of the Hindu
Kush.

The northern part of Iran is covered by dense rain forests called Shomal or the
Jungles of Iran.[citation needed] The eastern part consists mostly of desert
basins such as the Dasht-e Kavir, Iran's largest desert, in the north-central
portion of the country, and the Dasht-e Lut, in the east, as well as some salt
lakes. This is because the mountain ranges are too high for rain clouds to reach
these regions.

The only large plains are found along the coast of the Caspian Sea and at the
northern end of the Persian Gulf, where Iran borders the mouth of the Arvand
river. Smaller, discontinuous plains are found along the remaining coast of the
Persian Gulf, the Strait of Hormuz and the Gulf of Oman.

Iran's climate ranges from arid or semiarid, to subtropical along the Caspian
coast and the northern forests. On the northern edge of the country (the Caspian
coastal plain) temperatures rarely fall below freezing and the area remains
humid for the rest of the year. Summer temperatures rarely exceed 29 °C
(84.2 °F). Annual precipitation is 680 mm (26.8 in) in the eastern part of the
plain and more than 1,700 mm (66.9 in) in the western part. United Nations
Resident Coordinator for Iran Gary Lewis has said that "Water scarcity poses the
most severe human security challenge in Iran today".

To the west, settlements in the Zagros basin experience lower temperatures,
severe winters with below zero average daily temperatures and heavy snowfall.
The eastern and central basins are arid, with less than 200 mm (7.9 in) of rain,
and have occasional deserts. Average summer temperatures rarely exceed 38 °C
(100.4 °F). The coastal plains of the Persian Gulf and Gulf of Oman in southern
Iran have mild winters, and very humid and hot summers. The annual precipitation
ranges from 135 to 355 mm (5.3 to 14.0 in).

The wildlife of Iran is composed of several animal species, including bears,
gazelles, wild pigs, wolves, jackals, panthers, Eurasian lynx, and foxes. Other
domestic animals of Iran include sheep, goats, cattle, horses, water buffaloes,
donkeys, and camels. Pheasants, partridges, storks, eagles, and falcons are also
native to the wildlife of Iran.

One of the most famous members of the Iranian wildlife is the critically
endangered Asiatic cheetah, also known as the Iranian cheetah, whose numbers
were greatly reduced after the 1979 Revolution. The Persian leopard, which is
the world's largest leopard subspecies living primarily in northern Iran, is
also listed as an endangered species. Iran lost all its Asiatic lions and the
now extinct Caspian tigers by the earlier part of the 20th century.

At least 74 species of Iranian wildlife are on the red list of the International
Union for the Conservation of Nature, a sign of serious threats against the
country’s biodiversity. The Iranian Parliament has been showing disregard for
wildlife by passing laws and regulations such as the act that lets the Ministry
of Industries and Mines exploit mines without the involvement of the Department
of Environment, and by approving large national development projects without
demanding comprehensive study of their impact on wildlife habitats.

Iran is divided into five regions with thirty one provinces (ostān), each
governed by an appointed governor (ostāndār). The provinces are divided into
counties (shahrestān), and subdivided into districts (bakhsh) and sub-districts
(dehestān).

Iran has one of the highest urban growth rates in the world. From 1950 to 2002,
the urban proportion of the population increased from 27% to 60%. The United
Nations predicts that by 2030, 80% of the population will be urban.[not in
citation given] Most internal migrants have settled near the cities of Tehran,
Isfahan, Ahvaz, and Qom. The listed populations are from the 2006/07 (1385 AP)
census.[not in citation given]

Tehran, with a population of around 8.1 million (2011 census), is the capital
and largest city in Iran. It is an economical and cultural center in Iran, and
is the hub of the country's communication and transport network.

The country's second largest city, Mashhad, has a population of around 2.7
million (2011 census). It is the capital of Razavi Khorasan Province, and is a
holy city in Shia Islam, as it is the site of the Imam Reza Shrine. About 15 to
20 million pilgrims visit the Shrine of Imam Reza every year.

Isfahan, with a population of around 1.7 million (2011 census), is Iran's third
largest city and the capital of Isfahan Province. It was also a former capital
of Iran, and contains a wide variety of historical sites; including the famous
Image of the World Square, Siose Bridge, and the sites at the Armenian district
of New Jolfa. It is also home to the 5th largest shopping mall in the world,
namely Isfahan City Center.

The fourth major city of Iran, Karaj, has a population of around 1.6 million
(2011 census). It is the capital of Alborz Province, and is situated 20 km west
of Tehran, at the foot of the Alborz mountains. It is a major industrial city in
Iran, with large factories producing sugar, textiles, wire, and alcohol.

Tabriz, the capital of East Azerbaijan Province, is considered the second
industrial city of Iran (after Tehran). With a population of around 1.4 million
(2011 census), it is the fifth major city of Iran, which had been the
second-largest until the late 1960s. It is one of the former capitals of Iran,
the first capital of the Safavid Empire, and has also been proven extremely
influential in the country’s recent history.

Shiraz, with a population of around 1.4 million (2011 census), is the sixth
major city of Iran. It is the capital of Fars Province, and was also a former
capital of Iran. The area was greatly influenced by the Babylonian civilization,
and after the emergence of the ancient Persians, soon came to be known as
Persis. Persians were present in the region since the 9th century BC, and became
rulers of a large empire under the reign of the Achaemenid Dynasty in the 6th
century BC. The ruins of Persepolis and Pasargadae, two of the four capitals of
the Achaemenid Empire, are located around the modern-day city of Shiraz.

The political system of the Islamic Republic is based on the 1979 Constitution,
and comprises several intricately connected governing bodies. The Leader of the
Revolution ("Supreme Leader") is responsible for delineation and supervision of
the general policies of the Islamic Republic of Iran. The Supreme Leader is
Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces, controls the military intelligence and
security operations, and has sole power to declare war or peace. The heads of
the judiciary, state radio and television networks, the commanders of the police
and military forces and six of the twelve members of the Guardian Council are
appointed by the Supreme Leader. The Assembly of Experts elects and dismisses
the Supreme Leader on the basis of qualifications and popular esteem.

According to the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the powers of
government in the Islamic Republic of Iran are vested in the legislature, the
judiciary, and the executive powers, functioning under the supervision of the
"Absolute Guardianship and the Leadership of the Ummah" (ولایت مطلقه امر و امامت
امت) that refers to the Supreme Leader of Iran.

After the Supreme Leader, the Constitution defines the President of Iran as the
highest state authority. The President is elected by universal suffrage for a
term of four years and can only be re-elected for one term.[dubious – discuss]
Presidential candidates must be approved by the Guardian Council before running,
in order to ensure their allegiance to the ideals of the Islamic Revolution.

The President is responsible for the implementation of the Constitution and for
the exercise of executive powers, except for matters directly related to the
Supreme Leader, who has the final say in all matters. The President appoints and
supervises the Council of Ministers, coordinates government decisions, and
selects government policies to be placed before the legislature. The current
Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei has fired as well as reinstated Council of Ministers
members. Eight Vice-Presidents serve under the President, as well as a cabinet
of twenty-two ministers, who must all be approved by the legislature.

The legislature of Iran (known as the Islamic Consultative Assembly) is a
unicameral body comprising 290 members elected for four-year terms. It drafts
legislation, ratifies international treaties, and approves the national budget.
All parliamentary candidates and all legislation from the assembly must be
approved by the Guardian Council.

The Guardian Council comprises twelve jurists including six appointed by the
Supreme Leader. The others are elected by the Iranian Parliament from among the
jurists nominated by the Head of the Judiciary. The Council interprets the
constitution and may veto Parliament. If a law is deemed incompatible with the
constitution or Sharia (Islamic law), it is referred back to Parliament for
revision. The Expediency Council has the authority to mediate disputes between
Parliament and the Guardian Council, and serves as an advisory body to the
Supreme Leader, making it one of the most powerful governing bodies in the
country. Local city councils are elected by public vote to four-year terms in
all cities and villages of Iran.

Iran has adopted the separation of powers, having three typical division of
branches: Executive, Legislature, and the Judiciary.

The Supreme Leader appoints the head of Iran's judiciary, who in turn appoints
the head of the Supreme Court and the chief public prosecutor. There are several
types of courts including public courts that deal with civil and criminal cases,
and revolutionary courts which deal with certain categories of offenses,
including crimes against national security. The decisions of the revolutionary
courts are final and cannot be appealed.

The Special Clerical Court handles crimes allegedly committed by clerics,
although it has also taken on cases involving lay people. The Special Clerical
Court functions independently of the regular judicial framework and is
accountable only to the Supreme Leader. The Court's rulings are final and cannot
be appealed. The Assembly of Experts, which meets for one week annually,
comprises 86 "virtuous and learned" clerics elected by adult suffrage for
eight-year terms. As with the presidential and parliamentary elections, the
Guardian Council determines candidates' eligibility. The Assembly elects the
Supreme Leader and has the constitutional authority to remove the Supreme Leader
from power at any time. It has not challenged any of the Supreme Leader's
decisions. The current head of the judicial system Sadeq Larijani, appointed by
long-time Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei, said that it is illegal for the Assembly
of Experts to supervise Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei.

The Iranian government's officially stated goal is to establish a new world
order based on world peace, global collective security and justice. Often,
Iran's foreign relations since the time of the revolution have been portrayed as
being based on two strategic principles: eliminating outside influences in the
region and pursuing extensive diplomatic contacts with developing and
non-aligned countries.

Since 2005, Iran's nuclear program has become the subject of contention with the
international community following earlier quotes of Iranian leadership favoring
the use of an atomic bomb against Iran's enemies and in particular Israel. Many
countries have expressed concern that Iran's nuclear program could divert
civilian nuclear technology into a weapons program. This has led the UN Security
Council to impose sanctions against Iran which had further isolated Iran
politically and economically from the rest of the global community. In 2009, the
US Director of National Intelligence said that Iran, if choosing to, would not
be able to develop a nuclear weapon until 2013.

As of 2009[update], Iran maintains diplomatic relations with 99 members of the
United Nations, but not with the United States or Israel, a state which Iran has
not recognized since the 1979 Revolution.

On July 14, 2015, Tehran and the P5+1 came to a historic agreement to end
economic sanctions after demonstrating a peaceful nuclear research project that
meets International Atomic Energy Agency standards.

Iran is also a member of dozens of international organizations including the
G-15, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, IDA, IDB, IFC, ILO, IMF, International Maritime
Organization, Interpol, OIC, OPEC, the United Nations, WHO, and currently has
observer status at the World Trade Organization.

The Islamic Republic of Iran has two types of armed forces: the regular forces
Islamic Republic of Iran Army, Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force, Islamic
Republic of Iran Navy and the Revolutionary Guards, totaling about 545,000
active troops. Iran also has around 350,000 Reserve Force totaling around
900,000 trained troops.

Iran has a paramilitary, volunteer militia force within the IRGC, called the
Basij, which includes about 90,000 full-time, active-duty uniformed members. Up
to 11 million men and women are members of the Basij who could potentially be
called up for service; GlobalSecurity.org estimates Iran could mobilize "up to
one million men". This would be among the largest troop mobilizations in the
world. In 2007, Iran's military spending represented 2.6% of the GDP or $102 per
capita, the lowest figure of the Persian Gulf nations. Iran's military doctrine
is based on deterrence. In 2014 arms spending the country spent $15 billion and
was outspent by the states of the Gulf Cooperation Council by a factor of 13.

Iran supports the military activities of its allies in Syria, Iraq, and Lebanon
(Hezbollah) with thousands of rockets and missiles.

Since the 1979 Revolution, to overcome foreign embargoes, Iran has developed its
own military industry, produced its own tanks, armored personnel carriers,
guided missiles, submarines, military vessels, guided missile destroyer, radar
systems, helicopters and fighter planes. In recent years, official announcements
have highlighted the development of weapons such as the Hoot, Kowsar, Zelzal,
Fateh-110, Shahab-3 and Sejjil missiles, and a variety of unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs). Iran has the largest and most diverse ballistic missile arsenal
in the Middle East. The Fajr-3 (MIRV), a liquid fuel missile with an undisclosed
range which was developed and produced domestically, is currently the most
advanced ballistic missile of the country.

Iran's economy is a mixture of central planning, state ownership of oil and
other large enterprises, village agriculture, and small-scale private trading
and service ventures. In 2014, GDP was $404.1 billion ($1.334 trillion at PPP),
or $17,100 at PPP per capita. Iran is ranked as an upper-middle income economy
by the World Bank. In the early 21st century the service sector contributed the
largest percentage of the GDP, followed by industry (mining and manufacturing)
and agriculture.

The Central Bank of the Islamic Republic of Iran is responsible for developing
and maintaining the Iranian rial, which serves as the country's currency. The
government doesn't recognize trade unions other than the Islamic Labour
Councils, which are subject to the approval of employers and the security
services. The minimum wage in June 2013 was 487 million rials a month ($134).
Unemployment has remained above 10% since 1997, and the unemployment rate for
women is almost double that of the men.

In 2006, about 45% of the government's budget came from oil and natural gas
revenues, and 31% came from taxes and fees. As of 2007[update], Iran had earned
$70 billion in foreign exchange reserves mostly (80%) from crude oil exports.
Iranian budget deficits have been a chronic problem, mostly due to large-scale
state subsidies, that include foodstuffs and especially gasoline, totaling more
than $84 billion in 2008 for the energy sector alone. In 2010, the economic
reform plan was approved by parliament to cut subsidies gradually and replace
them with targeted social assistance. The objective is to move towards free
market prices in a 5-year period and increase productivity and social justice.

The administration continues to follow the market reform plans of the previous
one and indicated that it will diversify Iran's oil-reliant economy. Iran has
also developed a biotechnology, nanotechnology, and pharmaceuticals industry.
However, nationalized industries such as the bonyads have often been managed
badly, making them ineffective and uncompetitive with years. Currently, the
government is trying to privatize these industries, and, despite successes,
there are still several problems to be overcome, such as the lagging corruption
in the public sector and lack of competitiveness. In 2010, Iran was ranked 69,
out of 139 nations, in the Global Competitiveness Report.

Iran has leading manufacturing industries in the fields of car-manufacture and
transportation, construction materials, home appliances, food and agricultural
goods, armaments, pharmaceuticals, information technology, power and
petrochemicals in the Middle East. According to FAO, Iran has been a top five
producer of the following agricultural products in the world in 2012: apricots,
cherries, sour cherries, cucumbers and gherkins, dates, eggplants, figs,
pistachios, quinces, walnuts, and watermelons.

Economic sanctions against Iran, such as the embargo against Iranian crude oil,
have affected the economy. Sanctions have led to a steep fall in the value of
the rial, and as of April 2013 one US dollar is worth 36,000 rial, compared with
16,000 in early 2012. In 2015, Iran and the P5+1 reached a deal on the nuclear
program that removed the main sanctions pertaining to Iran's nuclear program by
2016.

Although tourism declined significantly during the war with Iraq, it has been
subsequently recovered. About 1,659,000 foreign tourists visited Iran in 2004,
and 2.3 million in 2009, mostly from Asian countries, including the republics of
Central Asia, while about 10% came from the European Union and North America.
Over five million tourists visited Iran in the fiscal year of 2014–2015, ending
March 21, four percent more year-on-year.

Alongside the capital, the most popular tourist destinations are Isfahan,
Mashhad and Shiraz. In the early 2000s, the industry faced serious limitations
in infrastructure, communications, industry standards and personnel training.
The majority of the 300,000 tourist visas granted in 2003 were obtained by Asian
Muslims, who presumably intended to visit important pilgrimage sites in Mashhad
and Qom. Several organized tours from Germany, France and other European
countries come to Iran annually to visit archaeological sites and monuments. In
2003, Iran ranked 68th in tourism revenues worldwide. According to UNESCO and
the deputy head of research for Iran Travel and Tourism Organization (ITTO),
Iran is rated 4th among the top 10 destinations in the Middle East. Domestic
tourism in Iran is one of the largest in the world. Weak advertising, unstable
regional conditions, a poor public image in some parts of the world, and absence
of efficient planning schemes in the tourism sector have all hindered the growth
of tourism.

Since the removal of some sanctions against Iran in 2015, tourism has re-surged
in the country. Over 5 million tourists visited Iran in the fiscal year of
2014–2015, four percent more than the previous year.

Iran has the second largest proved gas reserves in the world after Russia, with
33.6 trillion cubic metres, and third largest natural gas production in the
world after Indonesia, and Russia. It also ranks fourth in oil reserves with an
estimated 153,600,000,000 barrels. It is OPEC's 2nd largest oil exporter and is
an energy superpower. In 2005, Iran spent US$4 billion on fuel imports, because
of contraband and inefficient domestic use. Oil industry output averaged 4
million barrels per day (640,000 m3/d) in 2005, compared with the peak of six
million barrels per day reached in 1974. In the early years of the 2000s
(decade), industry infrastructure was increasingly inefficient because of
technological lags. Few exploratory wells were drilled in 2005.

In 2004, a large share of natural gas reserves in Iran were untapped. The
addition of new hydroelectric stations and the streamlining of conventional coal
and oil-fired stations increased installed capacity to 33,000 megawatts. Of that
amount, about 75% was based on natural gas, 18% on oil, and 7% on hydroelectric
power. In 2004, Iran opened its first wind-powered and geothermal plants, and
the first solar thermal plant is to come online in 2009. Iran is the third
country in the world to have developed GTL technology.

Demographic trends and intensified industrialization have caused electric power
demand to grow by 8% per year. The government’s goal of 53,000 megawatts of
installed capacity by 2010 is to be reached by bringing on line new gas-fired
plants and by adding hydroelectric, and nuclear power generating capacity.
Iran’s first nuclear power plant at Bushehr went online in 2011. It is the
second Nuclear Power Plant ever built in the Middle East after Metsamor Nuclear
Power Plant in Armenia.

Education in Iran is highly centralized. K-12 education is supervised by the
Ministry of Education, and higher education is under the supervision of the
Ministry of Science and Technology. The adult literacy rated 93.0% in September
2015, while it had rated 85.0% in 2008, up from 36.5% in 1976.

The requirement to enter into higher education is to have a high school diploma
and pass the national university entrance examination, Iranian University
Entrance Exam (known as concour), which is the equivalent of the US SAT exams.
Many students do a 1–2 year course of pre-university (piš-dānešgāh), which is
the equivalent of GCE A-levels and International Baccalaureate. The completion
of the pre-university course earns students the Pre-University Certificate.

Higher education is sanctioned by different levels of diplomas. Kārdāni
(associate degree; also known as fowq e diplom) is delivered after 2 years of
higher education; kāršenāsi (bachelor's degree; also known as licāns) is
delivered after 4 years of higher education; and kāršenāsi e aršad (master's
degree) is delivered after 2 more years of study, after which another exam
allows the candidate to pursue a doctoral program (PhD; known as doctorā).

According to the Webometrics Ranking of World Universities, the top-ranking
universities in the country are the University of Tehran (468th worldwide), the
Tehran University of Medical Sciences (612th) and Ferdowsi University of Mashhad
(815th).

Iran has increased its publication output nearly tenfold from 1996 through 2004,
and has been ranked first in terms of output growth rate, followed by China.
According to SCImago, Iran could rank fourth in the world in terms of research
output by 2018, if the current trend persists.

In 2009, a SUSE Linux-based HPC system made by the Aerospace Research Institute
of Iran (ARI) was launched with 32 cores, and now runs 96 cores. Its performance
was pegged at 192 GFLOPS. Sorena 2 Robot, which was designed by engineers at the
University of Tehran, was unveiled in 2010. The Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers (IEEE) has placed the name of Surena among the five
prominent robots of the world after analyzing its performance.

In the biomedical sciences, Iran's Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics is a
UNESCO chair in biology. In late 2006, Iranian scientists successfully cloned a
sheep by somatic cell nuclear transfer, at the Royan Research Center in Tehran.

According to a study by David Morrison and Ali Khadem Hosseini (Harvard-MIT and
Cambridge), stem cell research in Iran is amongst the top 10 in the world. Iran
ranks 15th in the world in nanotechnologies.

Iran placed its domestically built satellite, Omid into orbit on the 30th
anniversary of the 1979 Revolution, on 2 February 2009, through Safir rocket,
becoming the ninth country in the world capable of both producing a satellite
and sending it into space from a domestically made launcher.

The Iranian nuclear program was launched in the 1950s. Iran is the seventh
country to produce uranium hexafluoride, and controls the entire nuclear fuel
cycle.

Iranian scientists outside Iran have also made some major contributions to
science. In 1960, Ali Javan co-invented the first gas laser, and fuzzy set
theory was introduced by Lotfi Zadeh. Iranian cardiologist, Tofigh Mussivand
invented and developed the first artificial cardiac pump, the precursor of the
artificial heart. Furthering research and treatment of diabetes, HbA1c was
discovered by Samuel Rahbar. Iranian physics is especially strong in string
theory, with many papers being published in Iran. Iranian-American string
theorist Kamran Vafa proposed the Vafa-Witten theorem together with Edward
Witten. In August 2014, Maryam Mirzakhani became the first-ever woman, as well
as the first-ever Iranian, to receive the Fields Medal, the highest prize in
mathematics.

Iran is a diverse country, consisting of many religious and ethnic groups that
are unified through a shared Iranian language and culture.

Iran's population grew rapidly during the latter half of the 20th century,
increasing from about 19 million in 1956 to around 75 million by 2009. However,
Iran's birth rate has dropped significantly in recent years, leading to a
population growth rate—recorded from July 2012—of about 1.29%. Studies project
that the growth will continue to slow until it stabilizes above 105 million by
2050.

Iran hosts one of the largest refugee populations in the world, with more than
one million refugees, mostly from Afghanistan and Iraq. Since 2006, Iranian
officials have been working with the UNHCR and Afghan officials for their
repatriation. According to estimates, about five million Iranian citizens have
emigrated to other countries, mostly since the 1979 Revolution.

According to the Iranian Constitution, the government is required to provide
every citizen of the country with access to social security that covers
retirement, unemployment, old age, disability, accidents, calamities, health and
medical treatment and care services. This is covered by tax revenues and income
derived from public contributions.

The majority of the population speak Persian, which is also the official
language of the country. Others include speakers of the rest of the Iranian
languages within the greater Indo-European languages, and the languages of the
other ethnicities in Iran.

In northern Iran, mostly confined to Gilan and Mazenderan provinces, the Gilaki
and Mazenderani languages are widely spoken. They both have affinities to the
neighboring Caucasian languages. In parts of Gilan, the Talysh language is also
widely spoken, which stretches up to the neighboring country of Azerbaijan.
Kurdish is widely spoken in Kurdistan Province and nearby areas. In Khuzestan,
many distinct Persian dialects are spoken. The Lurish and Lari languages are
spoken in southwestern and southern Iran.

The Turkic languages and dialects, most importantly Azerbaijani Turkish which is
by far the most spoken language in the country after Persian, are spoken in
different areas in Iran, but are especially widely and dominantly spoken in the
provinces of Azerbaijan.

Notable minority languages in Iran include Armenian, Georgian, Neo-Aramaic, and
Arabic. Khuzi Arabic is spoken by the Arabs in Khuzestan, and the wider group of
Iranian Arabs. Circassian was also once widely used by the large Circassian
minority, but, due to assimilation over the many years, no sizable number of
Circassians speak the language anymore.

Percentages of spoken language continue to be a point of debate, as many opt
that they are politically motivated; most notably regarding the largest and
second-largest ethnicities in Iran, the Persians and Azerbaijanis. The following
percentages are according to the CIA's World Factbook: 53% Persian, 16%
Azerbaijani Turkish, 10% Kurdish, 7% Mazenderani and Gilaki, 7% Luri, 2%
Turkmen, 2% Balochi, 2% Arabic, and 2% the remainder Armenian, Georgian,
Neo-Aramaic, and Circassian.

As with the spoken languages, the ethnic group composition also remains a point
of debate, mainly regarding the largest and second largest ethnic groups, the
Persians and Azerbaijanis, due to the lack of Iranian state censuses based on
ethnicity. The CIA's World Factbook has estimated that around 79% of the
population of Iran are a diverse Indo-European ethno-linguistic group that
comprise the speakers of the Iranian languages, with Persians (incl.
Mazenderanis and Gilaks) constituting 61% of the population, Kurds 10%, Lurs 6%,
and Balochs 2%. Peoples of the other ethno-linguistic groups make up the
remaining 21%, with Azerbaijanis constituting 16%, Arabs 2%, Turkmens and Turkic
tribes 2%, and others 1% (such as Armenians, Talysh, Georgians, Circassians,
Assyrians).

The Library of Congress issued slightly different estimates: Persians 65% (incl.
Mazenderanis, Gilaks and Talysh people), Azerbaijanis 16%, Kurds 7%, Lurs 6%,
Baluchi 2%; Turkic tribal groups such as Qashqai 1%, and Turkmens 1%; and
non-Iranian, non-Turkic groups such as Armenians, Georgians, Assyrians,
Circassians, and Arabs less than 3%. It determined that Persian is the first
language of at least 65% of the country's population, and is the second language
for most of the remaining 35%.

Other non-governmental estimations regarding the groups other than the Persians
and Azerbaijanis roughly congruate with the World Factbook and the Library of
Congress. However, many scholarly and organisational estimations regarding the
number of these two groups differ significantly from the mentioned census.
According to many of them, the number of ethnic Azerbaijanis in Iran comprises
between 21.6–30% of the total population, with the majority holding it on 25%.cd
In any case, the largest population of Azerbaijanis in the world live in Iran.

Historically, Proto-Iranian religion and the subsequent Zoroastrianism and
Manichaeism were the dominant religions in Iran, particularly during the Median,
Achaemenid, Parthian and Sassanid empires. This changed after the fall of the
Sassanid Empire by the Muslim Conquest of Iran. Iran was predominantly Sunni
until the conversion of the country (as well as the people of what is today the
neighboring Republic of Azerbaijan) to Shia Islam by the order of the Safavid
dynasty in the 16th century.

Today, the Twelver Shia Islam is the official state religion, to which about 90%
to 95% of the population officially belong. About 4% to 8% of the population are
Sunni Muslims, mainly Kurds and Balochs. The remaining 2% are non-Muslim
religious minorities, including Christians, Jews, Bahais, Mandeans, Yezidis,
Yarsanis, and Zoroastrians.

Judaism has a long history in Iran, dating back to the Achaemenid Conquest of
Babylonia. Although many left in the wake of the establishment of the State of
Israel and the 1979 Revolution, around 8,756 Jews remain in Iran, according to
the latest census. Iran has the largest Jewish population in the Middle East
outside of Israel.

Around 250,000–370,000 Christians reside in Iran, and it is the largest
recognized minority religion in the nation. Most are of Armenian background with
a sizable minority of Assyrians as well.

Christianity, Judaism, Zoroastrianism, and the Sunni branch of Islam are
officially recognized by the government, and have reserved seats in the Iranian
Parliament. But the Bahá'í Faith, which is said to be the largest non-Muslim
religious minority in Iran, is not officially recognized, and has been
persecuted during its existence in Iran since the 19th century. Since the 1979
Revolution, the persecution of Bahais has increased with executions, the denial
of civil rights and liberties, and the denial of access to higher education and
employment.

The government has not released statistics regarding irreligiosity. However, the
irreligious figures are growing and are higher in the diaspora, notably among
Iranian Americans.

Owing to its dominant geopolitical position and culture in the world, Iran has
directly influenced cultures as far away as Greece, Macedonia, and Italy to the
West, Russia to the North, the Arabian Peninsula to the South, and indirectly
South and East Asia to the East.

Iranian works of art show a great variety in style, in different regions and
periods. Iranian art encompasses many disciplines, including architecture,
painting, weaving, pottery, calligraphy, metalworking, and stonemasonry. The
Median and Achaemenid empires left a significant classical art scene which
remained as basic influences for the art of the later eras. The art of the
Parthians was a mixture of Iranian and Hellenistic artworks, with their main
motifs being scenes of royal hunting expeditions and investitures. The Sassanid
art played a prominent role in the formation of both European and Asian medieval
art, which carried forward to the Islamic world, and much of what later became
known as Islamic learning, such as philology, literature, jurisprudence,
philosophy, medicine, architecture, and science, were of Sassanid basis.

There is also a vibrant Iranian modern and contemporary art scene, with its
genesis in the late 1940s. The 1949 Apadana Gallery of Tehran, which was
operated by Mahmoud Javadi Pour and other colleagues, and the emergence of
artists such as Marcos Grigorian in the 1950s, signaled a commitment to the
creation of a form of modern art grounded in Iran.

Iranian carpet-weaving dates back to the Bronze Age, and is one of the most
distinguished manifestations of the art of Iran. Iran is the world's largest
producer and exporter of handmade carpets, producing three quarters of the
world's total output and having a share of 30% of world's export markets.

The history of Iranian architecture goes back to the 7th millennium BC. Iranians
were among the first to use mathematics, geometry and astronomy in architecture.

Iranian architecture displays great variety, both structural and aesthetic,
developing gradually and coherently out of earlier traditions and experience.
The guiding motifs of Iranian architecture are unity, continuity and cosmic
symbolism.

Iran ranks seventh among countries with the most archaeological architectural
ruins and attractions from antiquity, as recognized by UNESCO.

Poetry is used in many Iranian classical works, whether in literature, science,
or metaphysics. The Persian language has been dubbed as a worthy language to
serve as a conduit for poetry, and is considered as one of the four main bodies
of world literature. Dialects of Persian are sporadically spoken throughout
regions from China to Syria and Russia, though mainly in the Iranian Plateau.

Iran has a number of famous poets; most notably Rumi, Ferdowsi, Hafez, Saadi
Shirazi, Khayyám Ney-Shapuri, and Nezami Ganjavi. Historically, Iranian
literature has inspired writers including Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Henry
David Thoreau, and Ralph Waldo Emerson.

Iranian philosophy originates to Indo-Iranian roots, with Zarathustra's
teachings having major influences.

According to the Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy, the chronology of the subject
and science of philosophy starts with the Indo-Iranians, dating this event to
1500 BC. The Oxford dictionary also states, "Zarathushtra's philosophy entered
to influence Western tradition through Judaism, and therefore on Middle
Platonism."

While there are ancient relations between the Indian Vedas and the Iranian
Avesta, the two main families of the Indo-Iranian philosophical traditions were
characterized by fundamental differences, especially in their implications for
the human being's position in society and their view of man's role in the
universe.

The Cyrus cylinder, which is known as "the first charter of human rights", is
often seen as a reflection of the questions and thoughts expressed by
Zarathustra, and developed in Zoroastrian schools of the Achaemenid Era.

The earliest tenets of Zoroastrian schools are part of the extant scriptures of
the Zoroastrian religion in the Avestan language. Among them are treatises such
as the Shikand-gumanic Vichar, Denkard, Zātspram, as well as older passages of
Avesta, and the Gathas.

Iranian mythology consists of ancient Iranian folklore and stories, all
involving extraordinary beings. They reflect attitudes towards the confrontation
of good and evil, actions of the gods, and the exploits of heroes and fabulous
creatures.

Myths play a crucial part in the culture of Iran, and understanding of them is
increased when they are considered within the context of actual events in the
history of Iran. The geography of Greater Iran, a vast area covering the
present-day Iran, the Caucasus, Anatolia, Mesopotamia and Central Asia, with its
high mountain ranges, plays the main role in much of the Iranian mythology.

Shahnameh of Ferdowsi is the main collection of the mythology of Iran, which
draws heavily on the stories and characters of Zoroastrianism, from the texts of
Avesta, Denkard and Bundahishn.

Iran has three official calendar systems, including the Solar calendar as the
main, the Gregorian calendar for international and Christian events, and the
Lunar calendar for Islamic events.

The main national annual of Iran is Nowruz, an ancient tradition celebrated on
21 March to mark the beginning of spring and the New Year of Iran. It is enjoyed
by people with different religions, but is a holiday for Zoroastrians. It was
registered on the list of Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of
Humanity, and was described as the Persian New Year by UNESCO in 2009.

Along with the national celebrations, annuals such as Ramezān, Eid e Fetr, and
Ruz e Āšurā are marked by Muslims; Noel, Čelle ye Ruze, and Eid e Pāk are
celebrated by Christians; and the festivals Purim, Eid e Fatir, and Tu Bišvāt
are celebrated by Jewish people in Iran.

Iran is the apparent birthplace of the earliest complex instruments, as
evidenced by the archaeological records found in Western Iran, dating back to
the 3rd millennium BC. The Iranian use of both vertical and horizontal angular
harps have been documented at the sites Madaktu and Kul-e Farah, with the
largest collection of Elamite instruments documented at Kul-e Farah. Multiple
depictions of horizontal harps were also sculpted in Assyrian palaces, dating
back between 865 and 650 BC.

Xenophon's Cyropaedia refers to a great number of singing women at the court of
the Achaemenid Iran. Athenaeus of Naucratis states that, by the time of the last
Achaemenid king, Artashata (336–330 BC), Achaemenid singing girls were captured
by the Macedonian general, Parmenion. Under the Parthian Empire, a type of epic
music was taught to youth, depicting the national epics and myths which were
later represented in the Shahnameh of Ferdowsi.

History of the Sassanid music is better documented than the earlier periods, and
is specially more evident in the Zoroastrian contexts. By the time of Khosrow
II, the Sassanid royal court was the host of prominent musicians, namely Ramtin,
Bamshad, Nakisa, Azad, Sarkash, and Barbad.

Some Iranian traditional musical instruments include saz, Persian tar,
Azerbaijani tar, dotar, setar, kamanche, harp, barbat, santur, tanbur, qanun,
dap, tompak, and ney.

The first national music society of the modern-day Iran was founded by Rouhollah
Khaleghi in the 1940s, with the School of National Music established in 1949.
Today, the main orchestra of Iran include the National Orchestra, the Nations
Orchestra, and the Symphony Orchestra of Tehran.

Iranian pop music emerged by the Qajar Era. It was led to major developments in
the 1950s, by the emergence of stars such as Viguen, who was referred to as the
king of Persian pop and jazz. The 1970s is known as a "Golden Age" for Iranian
pop music, where a revolution was formed in the music industry of Iran, using
indigenous instruments and forms and adding electric guitar. Hayedeh, Faramarz
Aslani, Farhad Mehrad, Googoosh, and Ebi are among the leading artists of this
period.

The emergence of genres such as modern rock in the 1970s and hip hop in the
1980s, which replaced the outdated musical styles among the youth, followed
major movements and influences in the music of Iran.

Theater background of Iran dates back to antiquity. The earliest recorded
representations of dancing figures within Iran were found in prehistoric sites
such as Tepe Sialk and Tepe Mūsīān.

The oldest initiation of theater and phenomena of acting among the people of
Iran can be traced in the epic ceremonial theaters, such as Soug e Sivash and
Mogh Koshi (Megakhouni), and also dances and theater narrations of Iranian
mythological tales reported by Herodotos and Xenophon.

There are several theatrical genres which emerged before the advent of cinema in
Iran, including Xeyme Shab Bazi (Puppetry), Saye Bazi (Shadow play), Ru-howzi
(Comical plays), and Tazieh (Sorrow plays).

Before the 1979 Revolution, the Iranian national stage had become a famous
performing scene for known international artists and troupes, with the Roudaki
Hall of Tehran constructed to function as the national stage for opera and
ballet. Opened on October 26, 1967, the hall is home to the Symphony Orchestra
of Tehran, the Opera Orchestra of Tehran, and the Iranian National Ballet
Company, and continues now with Vahdat Hall as its official name.

The opera Rostam o Sohrab, based on the epic of Rostam and Sohrab from
Shahnameh, is an example of opera performances in the modern-day Iran.

The earliest examples of visual representations in Iranian history are traced
back to the bas-reliefs of Persepolis, c. 500 BC. Persepolis was the ritual
center of the ancient kingdom of Achaemenids, and the figures at Persepolis
remain bound by the rules of grammar and syntax of visual language. The Iranian
visual arts reached a pinnacle by the Sassanid Era. A bas-relief from this
period in Taq Bostan depicts a complex hunting scene. Similar works from the
period have been found to articulate movements and actions in a highly
sophisticated manner. It is even possible to see a progenitor of the cinema
close-up in one of these works of art, which shows a wounded wild pig escaping
from the hunting ground.

By the early 20th century, the five-year-old modern industry of cinema came to
Iran. The first Iranian filmmaker was Mirza Ebrahim Khan (Akkas Bashi), the
official photographer of Mozaffar od Din Shah of Qajar. He obtained a camera and
filmed the Shah's visit to Europe.

In 1904, Mirza Ebrahim Khan (Sahhaf Bashi) opened the first movie theater in
Tehran. After him, several others like Russi Khan, Ardeshir Khan, and Ali Vakili
tried to establish new movie theaters in Tehran. Until the early 1930s, there
were around 15 cinema theaters in Tehran and 11 in other provinces.

The first silent Iranian film was made by Professor Ovanes Ohanian in 1930, and
the first sounded one, Lor Girl, was made by Abd ol Hossein Sepanta in 1932.

The 1960s was a significant decade for Iranian cinema, with 25 commercial films
produced annually on average throughout the early 60s, increasing to 65 by the
end of the decade. The majority of production focused on melodrama and
thrillers. With the screening of the films Kaiser and The Cow, directed by
Masoud Kimiai and Dariush Mehrjui respectively in 1969, alternative films set
out to establish their status in the film industry and Bahram Beyzai's Downpour
and Nasser Taghvai's Tranquility in the Presence of Others followed soon.
Attempts to organize a film festival that had begun in 1954 within the framework
of the Golrizan Festival, bore fruits in the form of the Sepas Festival in 1969.
The endeavors also resulted in the formation of the Tehran World Festival in
1973.

After the Revolution of 1979, as the new government imposed new laws and
standards, a new age in Iranian cinema emerged, starting with Viva... by Khosrow
Sinai and followed by many other directors, such as Abbas Kiarostami and Jafar
Panahi. Kiarostami, an admired Iranian director, planted Iran firmly on the map
of world cinema when he won the Palme d'Or for Taste of Cherry in 1997. The
continuous presence of Iranian films in prestigious international festivals,
such as the Cannes Film Festival, the Venice Film Festival, and the Berlin
International Film Festival, attracted world attention to Iranian masterpieces.
In 2006, six Iranian films, of six different styles, represented Iranian cinema
at the Berlin International Film Festival. Critics considered this a remarkable
event in the history of Iranian cinema.

Asghar Farhadi, a well-known Iranian director, has received a Golden Globe Award
and an Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film, and was named as one of the
100 Most Influential People in the world by Time Magazine in 2012.

The oldest records of animation in Iran date back to the late 3rd millennium BC.
An earthen goblet discovered at the site of the 5,200-year-old Burnt City in
southeastern Iran, depicts what could possibly be the world’s oldest example of
animation. The artifact bears five sequential images depicting a Persian ibex
jumping up to eat the leaves of a tree.

The art of animation, as practiced in modern Iran, started in the 1950s. After
four decades of Iranian animation production and three-decade experience of
Kanoon Institute, the Tehran International Animation Festival (TIAF) was
established in February 1999. Every two years, participants from more than 70
countries attend this event in Tehran, which holds Iran's biggest national
animation market.

Iran's telecommunications are handled by the state-owned Telecommunication
Company of Iran. Almost all of the media outlets in Iran are state-owned or
subject to authority monitoring. Outlets such as books, movies and music albums
must be approved by the Ministry of Ershad before being released to the public.

Most of the newspapers published in Iran are in Persian. The most widely
circulated periodicals of the country are based in Tehran. Iran's widespread
daily and weekly newspapers include Ettela'at, Kayhan, Hamshahri and Resalat.
Tehran Times, Iran Daily, and Financial Tribune are among the English language
newspapers based in Iran.

Television was introduced to Iran in 1958. Although the 1974 Asian Games was
broadcast in color, full color programming began in 1978. Since the 1979
Revolution, Iran's largest media corporation is the Islamic Republic of Iran
Broadcasting (IRIB). Over 30 percent of Iranians watch satellite channels, but
observers state that the figures are likely to be higher.

Iran received access to the Internet in 1993. According to 2014 census, around
40% of the population of Iran are Internet users. Iran ranks 24th among
countries by number of Internet users. According to the statistics provided by
the web information company of Alexa, Google Search and Yahoo! are the most used
search engines in Iran. Over 80% of the users of Telegram, a cloud-based instant
messaging service, are from Iran. Instagram is the most popular online social
networking service in Iran. Direct access to Facebook has been blocked in Iran
since the 2009 Iranian presidential election protests, due to organization of
the opposition movements on the website; but however, Facebook has around 12 to
17 million users in Iran who are using virtual private networks and proxy
servers to access the website. Around 90% of Iran's e-commerce takes place on
the Iranian online store of Digikala, which has around 750,000 visitors per day
and more than 2.3 million subscribers. Digikala is the most visited online store
in the Middle East, and ranks 4th among the most visited websites in Iran.

Iran is most likely the birthplace of polo, which is locally known as čowgān,
with its earliest records attributed to the ancient Medes.

Freestyle wrestling has been traditionally regarded as the national sport of
Iran, and the national wrestlers have been Olympic and world champions on many
occasions. Iran's traditional wrestling called košti e pahlevāni ("the heroic
wrestling") is registered on the UNESCO's intangible cultural heritage list.

Iran's National Olympic Committee was founded in 1947. Wrestlers and
weightlifters have achieved the country's highest records at the Olympics.

Soccer has been regarded as the most popular sport in Iran, with the men's
national team having won the Asian Cup on three occasions. The national team has
maintained its position as the best Asian squad, as it ranks 1st in Asia and
39th in the world according to the FIFA World Rankings (as of August
2016[update]).

Volleyball is the second most popular sport in Iran. The men's national team is
currently the strongest team in Asia, having won the 2011 and 2013 Asian Men's
Volleyball Championships, and rank 8th in the FIVB World Rankings (as of July
2016).

Basketball is also popular, with the men's national team having won three Asian
Championships since 2007.

Being a mountainous country, Iran is a venue for skiing, snowboarding, hiking,
rock climbing, and mountain climbing.

Iran is home to several ski resorts, the most famous being Tochal, Dizin and
Shemshak which are all within one to three hours traveling from the capital city
Tehran. The resort of Tochal, located in the Alborz mountain rage, is the
world's fifth-highest ski resort (3,730 m or 12,238 ft at its highest station).
Potentially suitable terrain can also be found in Lorestan, Mazenderan and other
provinces.

In September 1974, Iran became the first country in West Asia to host the Asian
Games. The Azadi Sport Complex, which is the largest sport complex in Iran, was
originally built for this occasion.

In 2016, Iran made global headlines for international female champions
boycotting tournaments in Iran in chess (U.S. Woman Grandmaster Nazi Paikidze)
and in shooting (Indian world champion Heena Sidhu) because they refused to
enter a country where they would be forced to wear a hijab to compete in their
sports.

Iranian cuisine is diverse due to its variety of ethnic groups and the influence
of other cultures. Herbs are frequently used along with fruits such as plums,
pomegranates, quince, prunes, apricots, and raisins. Iranians usually eat plain
yogurt with lunch and dinner; it is a staple of the diet in Iran. To achieve a
balanced taste, characteristic flavourings such as saffron, dried limes,
cinnamon, and parsley are mixed delicately and used in some special dishes.
Onions and garlic are normally used in the preparation of the accompanying
course, but are also served separately during meals, either in raw or pickled
form. Iran is also famous for its caviar.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Attack_on_Titan

Attack on Titan (Japanese: 進撃の巨人, Hepburn: Shingeki no Kyojin?, lit. "Attacking
Titan") is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Hajime Isayama.
The series began in Kodansha's Bessatsu Shōnen Magazine on September 9, 2009,
and has been collected into 21 tankōbon volumes as of December 2016. It is set
in a world where humanity lives in cities surrounded by enormous walls; a
defense against the Titans, gigantic humanoids that eat humans seemingly without
reason. The story initially centers on Eren Yeager, his adopted sister Mikasa
Ackerman and childhood friend Armin Arlert, who join the military to fight the
Titans after their home town is invaded and Eren's mother is eaten. However, as
the story progresses and the truths about the Titans are slowly revealed to the
reader, the narrative shifts to encompass Historia Reiss, squad leader Levi,
Eren's father Grisha, and other supporting characters.

The spin-off light novel series Before the Fall began in December 2011 and has
received a manga adaptation. Two additional light novel series and four
additional spin-off manga series have also been created. A television anime
adaptation produced by Wit Studio and Production I.G aired in Japan on MBS
between April and September 2013 and a second season is confirmed to be released
in April 2017. Four video game adaptations developed by Nitroplus staffers in
collaboration with Production I.G were announced to be released as bonus content
for the third and sixth volumes of the Blu-ray Disc release of the anime, with
another game developed by Spike Chunsoft for the Nintendo 3DS. A two-part
live-action film adaptation, Attack on Titan and Attack on Titan: End of the
World, and a live-action web-series were released in 2015. An anime adaptation
of the Junior High spin-off manga, produced by Production I.G, began airing in
October 2015. Attack on Titan and all five spin-off manga are published in North
America by Kodansha Comics USA, while the three novel series are published by
Vertical. The anime has been licensed by Funimation for North America, by Manga
Entertainment for the UK, and by Madman Entertainment for Australasia.

Attack on Titan has become a commercial success. As of March 2017, the manga has
63 million copies in print. The release of the anime also saw a boost in the
series' popularity, with it having received critical acclaim for its atmosphere
and story. Although it also gained fame in neighboring Asian countries, the
series' themes have been a subject of controversy.

Over 100 years before the beginning of the story, giant humanoid creatures
called Titans (巨人, Kyojin) suddenly appeared and nearly wiped out humanity,
devouring them without remorse or reason. What remains of humanity now resides
within three enormous concentric walls: the outermost is Wall Maria (ウォール・マリア,
Wōru Maria); the middle wall is Wall Rose (ウォール・ローゼ, Wōru Rōze, sometimes
pronounced like rosé) and the innermost is Wall Sheena (ウォール・シーナ, Wōru Shīna,
alt. "Wall Sina"). Inside these walls, humanity has lived in uneasy peace for
one hundred years; many people growing up without ever having seen a Titan. This
all changes when one day, a giant 60-meter (200 ft)-tall Colossus Titan
mysteriously appears after a strike of lightning and breaches the outer wall of
the Shiganshina district, a town at Wall Maria, allowing the smaller Titans to
invade the district. An Armored Titan smashes clean through Wall Maria, forcing
humankind to abandon the land between Wall Maria and Wall Rose, evacuating the
remaining population into the inner districts. The sudden influx of population
causes turmoil and famine.

Combating the Titans is the military, which is divided into three branches.
Foremost in the story is the Survey Corps (調査兵団, Chōsa Heidan), which goes out
into Titan territory to try to reclaim the land. The Survey Corps are heavily
derided in society because of their apparently senseless high casualty rate and
little sense of progress. The second and largest branch is the Garrison Regiment
(駐屯兵団, Chūton Heidan), which guards the walls and the civilian populace. The
third branch is the Military Police Brigade (憲兵団, Kenpeidan), who guards the
royal family and live relatively relaxed lives, although this eventually results
in fraud, corruption, and political subterfuge. The soldiers use a tethering
system called Vertical Maneuvering Equipment (立体機動装置, Rittai Kidō Sōchi) acting
as a grappling system, allowing them to jump onto (and swing from) walls, trees,
or nearby buildings to attack Titans with dual swords. However, despite it being
the soldiers' primary line of both offense and defense against the Titans, it is
useless in open and flat terrain like fields.

The story of Attack on Titan revolves around the adventures of Eren Yeager, his
foster sister, Mikasa Ackerman, and their childhood friend Armin Arlert. After
the wall which protects their hometown of Shinganshina is breached by the
Colossal Titan leading the other Titans to enter, Eren watches in horror as one
of them eats his mother. Vowing to kill all the Titans, Eren enlists in the
military, along with his friends.

Five years later, the three cadet graduates are positioned in Trost District,
one of the border towns jutting out of Wall Rose when the Titans attack again.
In the ensuing battle, Eren is eaten by one of the Titans before Armin's eyes. A
Titan later appears and begins fighting the other Titans while ignoring humans;
the Titan is revealed to be Eren, who has developed the ability to transform
into one. Though he is seen as a threat by some, he helps the military take back
Trost District. After being placed on trial for being a danger to the humans, he
is taken in by the Survey Corps' Special Operations Squad, led by Captain Levi.

In an expedition to Shinganshina, the Scouts are attacked by a Female Titan who
attempts to capture Eren. Although the Scouts are able to briefly capture the
Female Titan, she breaks free and devastates Levi's squad, forcing the
expedition to retreat. Armin determines that the Female Titan is Annie, one of
the cadets who taught Eren to fight, and devises a plan to capture her at
Stohess. During this operation, collateral damage reveals that Titans reside in
and make up the walls surrounding the human settlements.

Some of Eren's friends are also revealed to be able to transform into Titans and
had been sent as spies by an unknown party to find something called "The
Coordinate". It is later confirmed that the Coordinate is the power to control
other Titans at will, and that Eren holds that power. The royal family and the
Military Police track Eren and his friend Krista Lenz, who is actually Historia
Reiss, the successor to the real king, Rod Reiss, with the current king being
but a figurehead.

By making use of a new power obtained by Eren that allows him to create massive
and permanent structures, the Survey Corps hold another expedition, this time
managing to reach Shiganshina and seal the breach to reclaim Wall Maria.
However, they are ambushed by Zeke, the man behind the Titan invasions and the
spies, leading an army of Titans including the Colossal Titan against them. The
battle ends with Zeke retreating, and the Colossal Titan defeated and killed by
Armin, who becomes a Titan Shifter like Eren, but at the cost of the lives of
almost all members of the expedition, including the commander of the Survey
Corps, Erwin Smith.

Hajime Isayama created a 65-page one-shot version of Attack on Titan in 2006.
Originally, he also offered his work to the Weekly Shōnen Jump department at
Shueisha, where he was advised to modify his style and story to be more suitable
for Jump. He declined and instead decided to take it to the Weekly Shōnen
Magazine department at Kodansha. Before serialization began in 2009, he had
already thought of ideas for twists, although they are fleshed out as the series
progresses. The author initially based the scenery in the manga on that of his
hometown, which is surrounded by mountains. While working at an internet cafe,
Isayama encountered a customer who grabbed him by the collar. It was this
incident that showed him "the fear of meeting a person I can't communicate
with," which is the feeling that he conveys through the Titans. When designing
the appearances of the Titans, he uses several models such as martial artist
Yushin Okami for Eren Yeager's Titan form as well as Brock Lesnar for the
Armored Titan. George Wada, the anime's producer, stated that the "Wall of Fear"
was influenced by the isolated and enclosed nature of Japanese culture. He also
said that the inner feelings of every individual is one of the series' main
influences. Isayama later would confirm that Attack on Titan was inspired in
part by Muv-Luv Alternative, the second visual novel in the Muv-Luv visual novel
series.

Isayama estimated his basic monthly timeline as one week to storyboard and three
weeks to actually draw the chapter. The story is planned out in advance, even
marking down in which collected volumes a specific "truth" will be revealed. In
September 2013, he stated that he was aiming to end the series in 20 collected
volumes. Originally, Isayama planned to give the series a tragic conclusion
similar to that of the film adaptation of Stephen King's The Mist, where every
character dies. However, positive response to the manga and anime has caused the
author to contemplate changing the ending due to the impact it could have on
fans.

Hajime Isayama's original manga serial, Attack on Titan commenced publication in
Kodansha's monthly publication Bessatsu Shōnen Magazine starting with the
September 2009 issue. The first tankōbon collected volume was released on March
17, 2010. The most recent, volume 21, was released on December 9, 2016. In
November 2014, the manga had 45 million copies in print. By September 2016, the
number had increased to 60 million. The series' twelfth collected volume was
given a first printing of 2.2 million copies, making Attack on Titan one of only
two manga series ever to get an initial print surpassing 2 million, the other
being One Piece. Volume 13 has the highest initial first print of the series so
far, with 2,750,000 copies. It is also the first print run record for its
publisher, Kodansha.

A comedic spin-off of the series, titled Attack on Titan: Junior High (進撃！巨人中学校,
Shingeki! Kyojin Chūgakkō) and written by Saki Nakagawa, began serialization in
Bessatsu Shōnen Magazine's May 2012 issue. It follows the main characters as
they battle the Titans while in junior high school. Another manga series based
on the prequel light novels Attack on Titan: Before the Fall started running in
Kodansha's Monthly Shōnen Sirius from August 2013, drawn by Satoshi Shiki. An
additional spin-off based on the No Regrets visual novel was serialized in the
shōjo manga magazine Aria, titled Attack on Titan: No Regrets (進撃の巨人 悔いなき選択,
Shingeki no Kyojin: Kuinaki Sentaku). It is written by Gun Snark and illustrated
by Hikaru Suruga. It focuses on the origins of Captain Levi, one of the most
prominent characters in the main series. A yonkoma spin-off, called Spoof on
Titan (寸劇の巨人, Sungeki no Kyojin, "Titan Short Skits") and drawn by hounori, was
released on Kodansha's Manga Box smartphone and tablet application from December
2013 to December 30, 2014 in both Japanese and English. A manga adaptation of
Hiroshi Seko's Attack on Titan: Lost Girls novel, written and illustrated by
Ryōsuke Fuji, began publication in Bessatsu Shōnen Magazine on August 9, 2015.

In North America, the series is published in English by Kodansha Comics USA.
They published the first volume on June 19, 2012,. The fifteenth was released on
April 7, 2015. By July 2015, the manga had 2.5 million copies in circulation in
North America. The first three spin-off manga have also been licensed by
Kodansha Comics USA, who published the first volume of each between March and
June 2014. It announced its license to Spoof on Titan at the New York Comic Con
in October 2015, and its acquisition of Lost Girls in March 2016.

A light novel series titled Attack on Titan: Before the Fall (進撃の巨人 Before the
fall), written by Ryō Suzukaze and illustrated by Thores Shibamoto, began on
April 1, 2011. Its story is set before the events of the manga and it was
published by Kodansha in three volumes. While the first tells the story of
Angel, the blacksmith who develops the first prototypes of the Vertical
Maneuvering Equipment, the following two follow a young man who was found as a
baby in the stomach of a Titan. A second light novel series called Attack on
Titan: Harsh Mistress of the City (進撃の巨人　隔絶都市の女王, Shingeki no Kyojin Kakuzetsu
Toshi no Joō), written by Ryō Kawakami and illustrated by Range Murata, began on
August 1, 2014. Vertical began releasing the novels in North America in the
summer of 2014. A novel titled Attack on Titan: Lost Girls (進撃の巨人 Lost Girls),
written by Hiroshi Seko, was published on December 9, 2014. It comprises three
short stories featuring Mikasa and Annie Leonhart, titled "Lost in the cruel
world", "Wall Sina, Goodbye", and "Lost Girls". It was also released in English
by Vertical.

An anime television series adaptation produced by Wit Studio (a subsidiary of IG
Port) aired on MBS between April 7, 2013 and September 29, 2013, directed by
Tetsurō Araki with Yūki Kaji starring as Eren, Yui Ishikawa voicing Mikasa and
Marina Inoue as Armin. Both Funimation and Crunchyroll simulcast the series on
their respective websites, and Funimation began releasing the series on North
American home video in 2014. The anime has been licensed in the UK by Manga
Entertainment. Madman Entertainment acquired the show for distribution in
Australia and New Zealand. The final episode was also aired in Japanese
theaters. The anime had some production issues with needing more animators with
Wit Studios' character designer, Kyoji Asano tweeting and looking for active
animators to work on the anime. An OVA version of the "Ilse's Notebook" special
chapter from tankōbon volume 5 was originally scheduled to be released on August
9, 2013, bundled with the volume 11 limited edition, but was postponed and
included with a limited edition of volume 12, released on December 9, 2013,
instead. The OVA was bundled on subtitled DVD with the English limited edition
release of the 17th manga volume, released on December 1, 2015. A second OVA was
released on April 9, 2014, bundled with the 13th volume of the series, this one
focused on the members of the 104th Training Corps. Two additional OVA episodes,
based on the Attack on Titan: No Regrets prequel manga, were bundled with the
15th and 16th volumes of the main series, released on December 9, 2014 and April
9, 2015, respectively. The anime previously aired on Adult Swim's Toonami block.
In Australia, the anime currently airs on SBS 2 on Tuesdays, in Japanese with
English subtitles, with the first episode having aired on September 30.

The anime was compiled into two animated theatrical films with new voice acting
from the same cast. The first film Attack on Titan – Part 1: Crimson Bow and
Arrow (「進撃の巨人」前編～紅蓮の弓矢～, Shingeki no Kyojin Zenpen ~Guren no Yumiya~) covers the
first 13 episodes and was released on November 22, 2014, while the second film
Attack on Titan – Part 2: Wings of Freedom (「進撃の巨人」後編～自由の翼～, Shingeki no Kyojin
Kōhen ~Jiyū no Tsubasa~) adapts the remaining episodes and adds new opening and
ending footage. It was released on June 27, 2015. A rebroadcast of the first
season was aired from January 9, 2016 on NHK's BS Premium channel. The
compilation films were also broadcast in January 2017 on MBS.

A second season of the anime series was announced on the opening day of the
first theatrical film, which was originally set to be released in 2016. It was
then confirmed in the January 2017 issue of the Bessatsu Shōnen Magazine that
the second season will premiere in April 2017. Masashi Koizuka is directing the
second season, with Araki now acting as chief director. It has also been
licensed by Funimation.

A television anime adaptation of the Attack on Titan: Junior High manga spin-off
began airing in October 2015. The series was directed by Yoshihide Ibata at
Production I.G, with series composition by Midori Gotou, character design by
Yuuko Yahiro, and music by Asami Tachibana. Linked Horizon will be back to do
the opening theme "Youth Like Fireworks". The ending theme, "Ground's
Counterattack" ("Hangeki no Daichi"), is performed by the voice actors for Eren,
Mikasa, and Jean. A rebroadcast of the series was aired during January 2016.

For the first thirteen episodes, the opening theme is "Guren no Yumiya" (紅蓮の弓矢,
lit. "Crimson Bow and Arrow", styled in German as "Feuerroter Pfeil und Bogen")
by Linked Horizon, and the ending theme is "Utsukushiki Zankoku na Sekai"
(美しき残酷な世界, lit. "This Beautiful Cruel World") by Yōko Hikasa. For episodes
14–25, the opening theme is "Jiyū no Tsubasa" (自由の翼, lit. "Wings of Freedom",
styled in German as "Die Flügel der Freiheit") by Linked Horizon, and the ending
theme is "great escape" by Cinema Staff. Both "Guren no Yumiya" and "Jiyū no
Tsubasa" were released as part of the single "Jiyū e no Shingeki" on July 10,
2013.

The series' soundtrack was composed by Hiroyuki Sawano, and the first CD was
released on June 28, 2013 by Pony Canyon. The first CD contains 16 tracks, with
6 vocal tracks featuring performances by Mika Kobayashi, mpi, Cyua, Aimee
Blackschleger and CASG. The second CD containing the other half of the
soundtrack was released on October 16, 2013 as a bonus offered with the fourth
Blu-ray and DVD limited edition volumes of the anime.

There have been four video game adaptations of Attack on Titan developed by
Nitroplus staffers in collaboration with Production I.G. Nitroplus clarified
that the studio as a company is not involved in the Attack on Titan Blu-ray Disc
games, while individual staffers are. The games are visual novels and were
included in the first copies of the third and sixth Blu-ray Disc volumes of the
anime. The games cover spin-off stories about the characters of Attack on Titan.
Isayama supervised the development of the games.

The third Blu-ray volume was released on September 18 with Seko's Lost in the
Cruel World visual novel about Mikasa, and a preview of Gun Snark's No Regrets
(悔いなき選択, Kuinaki Sentaku, lit. "A Choice with No Regrets"). The sixth Blu-ray
volume was released on December 18 with the full version of No Regrets about
Levi and Erwin's past, Jin Haganeya's visual novel In the Forest of the Night,
Burning Bright about Eren and Levi, and Seko's Wall Sina, Goodbye visual novel
about Annie.

An action game, titled Attack on Titan: Humanity in Chains (進撃の巨人 ～反撃の翼～,
Shingeki no Kyojin ~Hangeki no Tsubasa~, subtitle lit. "Wings of
Counterattack"), was developed by Spike Chunsoft for the Nintendo 3DS and
released in Japan on December 5, 2013, North America on May 12, 2015 and Europe
on July 2, 2015.

A smartphone social game, titled Attack on Titan: Howl Toward Freedom (Shingeki
no Kyojin ~Jiyū e no Hōkō~) is in development by Mobage for iOS and Android
platforms. In the game, players play as a character who has been exiled from
Wall Rose. Players must build and fortify a town outside the wall and expand it
by manufacturing items as well as using Titans and exploiting resources from
other players.

A set of Attack on Titan costumes was added to Dead or Alive 5 Last Round in
July 2016, alongside a playable arena based on Wall Rose during an attack by the
Colossal Titan.

Additionally, Attack on Titan gameplay and merchandise has been featured in a
crossover event with Nexon MMORPG MapleStory in its Japanese and GMS versions.

Another game, Attack on Titan, for PlayStation 4, PlayStation 3, and PlayStation
Vita, published by Koei Tecmo and developed by Omega Force, was announced at
Gamescom 2015. It was released on February 18, 2016 in Japan. Later was
confirmed to be released worldwide along with PC and Xbox One versions.

Capcom are developing an Attack on Titan arcade game named Shingeki no Kyojin:
Team Battle.

Another title in the series, Attack on Titan: Escape from Certain Death was
announced to be in development for the Nintendo 3DS. It was announced in Famitsu
magazine in October 2016. The game is set for release in Japan on March 30,
2017. The game was initially suppose to launched on March 30, 2017 but was later
postponed to a later date May 11, 2017.

A live-action film was announced to be in production in October 2011. In
December 2012, it was reported that Tetsuya Nakashima left his position as
director. According to film distributor Toho, Nakashima had considerable
creative differences on the scriptwriting and other matters. In December 2013,
Shinji Higuchi was revealed to be directing, and would also be responsible with
the special effects. Writer Yūsuke Watanabe and critic/subculture expert
Tomohiro Machiyama was announced to be scripting the movie with series creator
Isayama. In July 2014, it was revealed that two films will be released in the
summer of 2015. A teaser trailer for the first live-action film was released in
March 2015. The following month, Toho released the second trailer for the first
film, and announced the second installment will be called Attack on Titan: End
of the World. In June 2015, a third trailer for the first film was released,
revealing the Three-Dimensional Maneuvering Gear, as well as confirming the film
will be released in IMAX theaters in Japan.

A live-action miniseries, titled Shingeki no Kyojin: Hangeki no Noroshi (進撃の巨人
反撃の狼煙?, "Attack on Titan: Beacon for Counterattack") and utilizing the same
actors as the films, started streaming on NTT DoCoMo's online-video service dTV
on August 15, 2015. The three episode series focuses on Zoë Hange and her
research of the Titans, as well as how the Vertical Maneuvering Equipment was
created.

Deadline.com reported that Warner Bros. is in negotiations to secure the film
rights to the Attack on Titan franchise. Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them
producer David Heyman would be on board to produce a proposed two-film project
that would remake the 2015 Japanese live-action film adaptations. A day later,
however, Kodansha representatives said there were no negotiations with Warner
Bros.

A Stage Play titled LIVE IMPACT was announced on the wraparound jacket band on
Volume 21. It is scheduled to run from July 28 to September 3, 2017.

Two guidebooks to the manga titled Inside and Outside were released on April 9
and September 9, 2013, featuring concept art, character profiles and interviews.
They were combined into one and released in North America on September 16, 2014,
by Kodansha USA.

A 16-minute drama CD was created with the anime's staff and included in the
January 2014 issue of Bessatsu Shōnen Magazine.

On November 3, 2014, American writer C. B. Cebulski revealed that a crossover
between Attack on Titan and Marvel Comics was in the works. Cebulski scripts the
scenario written by the original author Hajime Isayama. The one-shot crossover
featured Spider-Man, the Avengers and the Guardians of the Galaxy facing off
against several Titans, including the Colossal Titan, the Armored Titan, and the
Female Titan on the streets of New York City. During Free Comic Book Day 2015,
Marvel's Secret Wars preview included an 8-page presentation "Attack on
Avengers" by creator Hajime Isayama with art by Gerardo Sandova. It was
announced at the 2015 New York Comic-Con that an American comic book titled
Attack on Titan Anthology will be published.

From January 23 to May 10, 2015, Universal Studios Japan hosted attractions
based on Attack on Titan. “The Real” Attack on Titan Experience features a
life-size 15 meter tall Eren titan engaging a 14 meter tall female titan in
combat. Other attractions include a ground level titan, which visitors can pose
with.

Attack on Titan won the Kodansha Manga Award in the shōnen category in 2011, was
nominated for the 4th Manga Taishō Award and both the 16th and 18th annual
Tezuka Osamu Cultural Prize. The 2012 edition of Kono Manga ga Sugoi!, which
surveys people in the manga and publishing industry, named Attack on Titan the
eighth best manga series for male readers, while the 2014 edition named it the
sixth best. Attack on Titan was the top favorite manga for Yomiuri Shimbun's
Sugoi Japan Awards in 2015. Attack on Titan was the second highest selling manga
series of 2013, with 15,933,801 copies sold in a single year. In April 2014,
Oricon reported that 30 million volumes of the series have been sold. In the
first half of 2014 it topped the chart, ending One Piece's five-year reign as
the highest selling series in that period, with Isayama surprised about it and
thanking the readers. By the end of the year, it was the second best selling
manga with 11,728,368 copies sold. In 2015, the series sold 8,778,048 copies
ranking third for the year. In 2016, the series sold 6,544,081. The manga's
publisher, Kodansha, credits Attack on Titan for the company's first revenue
increase in eighteen years. The anime is noted to have helped in boosting the
series' sales while Mainichi Shimbun called it a "once-in-a-decade hit."

Six of the seven English volumes published in North America at the time charted
on The New York Times Manga Best Seller list for the week of October 13, 2013,
and volume one was on the list for 81 weeks straight. In June 2015, the first
volume clocked in at its 100th week on the top 10 chart. It also currently holds
the title of appearing on the list for a volume with 121 weeks. Volume one was
also number one on Nielsen BookScan's list of top 20 graphic novels in American
bookstores for October 2013, and for the month of September, the series had more
volumes on the list than any other series. The Young Adult Library Services
Association in the United States named the series one of its "Great Graphic
Novels for Teens" in 2013. Kodansha USA's English release won the 2014 Harvey
Award for Best American Edition of Foreign Material. Attack on Titan was the
only manga to be nominated for the 2015 Goodreads Choice Award for Best Graphic
Novel/Comic.

Many have analyzed Attack on Titan as representing "the hopelessness felt by
young people in today's society." while writer Mao Yamawaki called it a
"coming-of-age story of the boys and girls at its core," with a new mystery
every episode. It is these mysteries that critic Tomofusa Kure says amplifies
readers' expectations. The artwork of the manga has been criticized as crude by
some reviewers, with Isayama himself admitting his drawings are "amateurish."
However, those same critics stated that after years of serialization, the art
has been improving, and Kure believes that had the illustrations been "refined",
it would not have conveyed the "eeriness" that is a key characteristic of the
work. In a short review, Jason Thompson noted how the characters conveniently
receive "power-ups" to create plot twists, but concluded that these said plot
twists and the manga's post-apocalyptic world are "too good to miss."

The anime has been very successful in Japan, with average sales of 52,067 across
9 volumes, with a total of 468,603 as of August 2016. It was the number one
selling TV anime of 2013 in Japan. It was also the number one streaming anime
from Funimation in 2014 and the number one fan favorite Funimation home video
released of 2014. The anime adaptation won multiple prizes during the 3rd
Newtype Anime Awards, including Best Director, Best Script, Best Soundtrack,
Best Theme Song, Top Female Character and Title of the Year. It received the
award for Best TV Animation at the 2013 Animation Kobe Awards. It received the
award for Animation of the Year at the 2014 Tokyo Anime Award, along with, Best
Director, Best Screenplay and Best Music. It won the 2013 Digital Contents of
the Year Award at Japan's 19th annual Association of Media in Digital (AMD)
Awards. Carl Kimlinger from Anime News Network was sharply critical of the first
two episodes of the anime adaptation. He did praise the show for "[bringing]
back the terror of the fee-fi-fo-fum set", but then said that it "does not a
good show make". Kimlinger criticized Araki's direction, saying he "clearly
intends it to be powerful and unsettling, but it's just crude and unpleasant."
On the other hand, other critics from Anime News Network praised much of the
series. Rebecca Silverman said it "is both gorgeous and appalling in its
visuals", and "an excellent mix of what 18th century Gothic novelist Ann
Radcliffe defined as horror versus terror: the one is physical, making you want
to look away, and the other is intellectual, making you want to know what's
going to happen next." Though there are several apocalyptic action shows, Carlo
Santos noted that "few get as close to perfection as Attack on Titan does".
Santos described it as "a masterpiece of death and destruction" even if he only
watched the first episode. Theron Martin of Anime News Network praised the
musical score and the "intense, impactful first episode" despite his feeling
that it has "limited animation". Martin also compared Attack on Titan's vibe and
visual aesthetic to Claymore.

The series has gained a strong popularity in not only Japan but also throughout
the world. For instance, coverage of the anime appeared on the front page of the
Hong Kong free newspaper am730 on May 27, 2013, concerning its popularity within
Hong Kong as well as in China and Taiwan. However, the series also attracted
criticism: the South Korean Electronic Times magazine accused Attack on Titan of
having a militaristic message that serves Japanese Prime Minister Shinzō Abe's
political leanings; while the series also resonated with Hong Kong youths who
saw the invading Titans as a metaphor for Mainland China. Hong Kong media
commentator Wong Yeung-tat praised Isayama's style and the versatility of Attack
on Titan's setting, which opens itself to readers' various interpretations. In
2013, after media linked to a 2010 blog post by Isayama indicating that the
design of the character Dot Pixis was based on the Imperial Japanese General
Akiyama Yoshifuru, an Internet flame war about the general's war record (e.g.
allowing the Port Arthur massacre to occur) ensued on his blog and included
death threats to the author. Because many of the threats written in Japanese had
grammatical errors, it is believed that they were written by people outside of
Japan.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NBA_salary_cap

The NBA salary cap is the limit to the total amount of money that National
Basketball Association teams are allowed to pay their players. Like many
professional sports leagues, the NBA has a salary cap to control costs, defined
by the league's collective bargaining agreement (CBA). This limit is subject to
a complex system of rules and exceptions and as such is considered a "soft" cap.

The actual amount of the salary cap varies from year to year, and is calculated
as a percentage of the league's revenue from the previous season. Under the CBA
ratified in December 2011, the cap will continue to vary in future seasons based
on league revenues. For the 2015–16 season, the salary cap was $70 million and
the luxury tax limit was $84.74 million. For the 2016–17 season, the salary cap
will be set at $94.14 million and the luxury tax limit will be $113.29 million.
For the 2017–18 season, the latest projection is $102 million for the salary cap
and $122 million for the luxury tax limit.

The NBA had a salary cap in the mid-1940s, but it was abolished after only one
season. The league continued to operate without such a cap until 1984–85 season,
when one was instituted in an attempt to level the playing field among all of
the NBA's teams and ensure competitive balance for the League in the future.
Before the cap was reinstated, teams could spend whatever amount of money they
wanted on players, but in the first season under the new cap, they were each
limited to $3.6 million in total payroll.

Under the 2005 CBA, salaries were capped at 57 percent of basketball-related
income (BRI) and lasted for six years until June 30, 2011. The current 2011 CBA
set the cap at 51.2 percent of BRI in 2011–12, with a 49-to-51 band in
subsequent years.

To ensure the players get their share of the BRI, teams are required to spend 90
percent of the salary cap each year, the salary floor for the 2016–17 season
will be 84.73 million.

In December 2016, the league and the players' union reached a tentative
agreement on a new CBA, with both sides ratifying it by the end of that month.
The new agreement will run through the 2023–24 season, with either side able to
opt out after the 2022–23 season.

Unlike the NFL and NHL, the NBA features a so-called soft cap, meaning that
there are several significant exceptions that allow teams to exceed the salary
cap to sign players. This is done to allow teams to keep their own players,
which, in theory, fosters fan support in each individual city. By contrast, the
NFL and NHL caps are considered hard, meaning that they offer relatively few (if
any) circumstances under which teams can exceed the salary cap. The NBA version
of the "soft" cap does, however, offer less leeway to teams than that of the
MLB. MLB does allow teams to spend as much as they want on salary, but it
penalizes them a percentage of the amount by which they exceed the soft cap. The
percentage increases as the number of consecutive years a team exceeds the cap
grows, resetting only when a team falls under the cap.

The maximum amount of money a player can sign for is based on the number of
years that player has played and the total of the salary cap. The maximum salary
of a player with 6 or fewer years of experience is either $9,000,000 or 25% of
the total salary cap (2013–14: $14,670,000), whichever is greater. For a player
with 7–9 years of experience, the maximum is $11,000,000 or 30% of the cap
(2013–14: $17,603,700), and for a player with 10+ years of experience, the
maximum is $14,000,000 or 35% of the cap (2013–2014: $20,537,650). There is an
exception to this rule: a player is able to sign a contract for 105% of his
previous contract, even if the new contract is higher than the league limit.

The 2017 CBA will make a subtle change to the determination of maximum salaries.
Under the 2011 CBA, the salary cap was based on players receiving 44.74% of the
league's basketball-related income (BRI), while the calculation of maximum
salaries used a lower figure of 42.14% of BRI. This difference will be
eliminated in the 2017 CBA, with the same 44.74% of BRI used for both cap and
maximum salary calculations.

Each team in the NBA can nominate a player on his rookie contract to receive a
"Designated Player" contract extension. A Designated Player is eligible for a
5-year contract extension, instead of being held to the standard 4-year
restriction. A team can only allocate a single Designated Player contract at any
one time (if a team has already extended a rookie contract by using the
Designated Player extension they cannot create a second Designated Player
contract until the current contract expires, or until the player moves to a
different team); however the CBA rules do allow teams to sign a second
Designated Player from another team in addition to the one they already have.
All teams are limited to having a maximum of two Designated Players contracted
on their roster at any time (one which they have created from one of their own
rookie contracts, and one which they have acquired from another team).

Under the 2017 CBA, the "Designated Player" limit will remain at two, but in a
new feature, teams will be able to create Designated Player contracts from their
own veteran contracts. In addition, teams may use their Designated Player slots
on any combination of their own rookie contracts, their own veteran contracts,
or players acquired in trades.

A Designated Player coming off his rookie contract may be eligible to earn 30%
of the salary cap (rather than the standard 25%) if he passes certain criteria.
To be eligible, the player must be voted to start in two All-Star Games, or be
named to an All-NBA Team twice (at any level), or be named MVP. Officially
titled the "5th Year 30% Max Criteria", it has been dubbed (and is more commonly
known as) the "Derrick Rose Rule" after the 2011 MVP, due to the fact that when
the criterion was introduced, Rose was the only player in the NBA eligible to
sign the maximum extension (due to his MVP award). The reasoning for the rule is
to suitably reward players being extended off of their rookie contract who are
considered to be of a higher "caliber" than their peers, without restricting
them to the lower (25%) salary level. A player may sign a "5th Year, 30% Max"
contract before the final year of his rookie contract and before fulfilling the
criteria needed to receive the 30% salary grade. Should the player fail to
fulfil the criteria before the start of his Designated Player contract, he will
receive the standard five year, 25% Designated Player contract. James Harden of
the Houston Rockets and Anthony Davis of the New Orleans Pelicans had such a
clause in their contract extensions, but both failed to meet the criteria. The
only player in the NBA who was attempting to qualify for a full 30% contract in
2013–14 was Paul George, who signed a provisional 30%/5 year contract in
September 2013. George, who had made the All-NBA third team in 2012–13,
qualified by again making the All-NBA third team.

In addition the following players are known to have signed 5 year/25% contracts:

Kevin Love was eligible for a designated player contract, but the Minnesota
Timberwolves opted for a 4-year contract (with a player option year included,
potentially allowing him to become an unrestricted free agent) instead. During
Kevin Durant's final five seasons with the Oklahoma City Thunder (2011–2016), he
received a Designated Player level salary. His contract was initially drawn up
before the lockout—during which the Derrick Rose Rule was implemented—but was
officially approved under the provisions of the 2005 CBA by the NBA after the
lockout. This led some people to question whether the Thunder had (with NBA
approval) effectively signed two players as their Designated Player, as both
were contracted for 5 years.

The provision in the 2017 CBA that will allow teams to create Designated Player
contracts for their own veteran players, officially known as the "Designated
Veteran Player Extension" (DVPE), came to be called the "Kevin Durant Rule"
because it was seen as a reaction to a wave of veteran superstars leaving their
teams in free agency, capped off by Durant's departure from the Thunder to the
Golden State Warriors in the 2016 offseason. The 2011 CBA allowed all of the
teams that were trying to lure Durant to offer him the same initial salary of
$26.5 million.

Additionally, the team offering the extension must have originally drafted the
player, or obtained him in a trade while he was on his rookie contract.

Players who qualify can be offered contracts with a starting salary between 30
and 35% of the salary cap. The extension cannot last more than five years after
the expiration of the player's current contract (or five years for a player who
is a free agent when signed), but can be negotiated and signed one year before
the current contract expires. The extension can be offered to a team's own free
agent as well as a player with time left on his contract. Additionally, once a
player signs a DVPE, he cannot be traded for one year.

Ironically, while the rule was intended to encourage star players to stay with
their current teams, the first major move by an NBA team involving a player
eligible for the DVPE was the Sacramento Kings' trade of DeMarcus Cousins to the
New Orleans Pelicans during the 2017 All-Star break. Cousins' contract with the
Kings was not set to expire until 2018, but he was eligible to sign a DVPE after
the 2016–17 season for up to $209 million over five years, an amount that the
Kings were apparently unwilling to commit to.

Once a year, teams can use a mid-level exception (MLE) to sign a player to a
contract for a specified maximum amount. The amount of the MLE and its duration
depend on the team's cap status. The MLE was initially set at $5 million for a
duration of four years for teams that are over the cap either before or after
the signing, but under the luxury tax apron, which is $4M above the tax line.
Teams above the luxury tax apron have an MLE that was initially set at $3
million with a three-year duration. Teams with cap room, previously ineligible
for the MLE, have a new MLE, initially $2.5 million with a two-year duration.
The MLE was frozen at the stated levels through the 2012–13 season, since then,
it has increased by 3% per season (with the percentage based on the initial
amount of the exception, and not compounded). In turn, this means that MLEs in
the current 2016–17 season are:

Before the 2011 CBA, the MLE was equal to the average NBA salary for all teams
over the cap. Teams with cap room were previously ineligible for the MLE. The
Mid-Level Exception for the 2008–09 NBA season was $5.585 million. The MLE was
$5.854 million for the 2009–10 NBA regular season.

Under the 2017 CBA, the apron will initially be set at $6 million above the tax
line for the 2017–18 season. In a new feature, the apron will change from season
to season, with the percentage change (up or down) set at half of the rate of
change of the cap for that season.

An example of the bi-annual exception was the Los Angeles Lakers' signing of
Karl Malone to a contract before the 2003–04 season.

The exception was eliminated for luxury tax paying teams following the 2011 NBA
lockout as many high spending teams were using this as a tool to gain top paid
players.

The NBA allows teams to sign their first-round draft choices to rookie "scale"
contracts even if their payroll exceeds the cap.

Perhaps the most well-known of the NBA's salary cap exceptions is the Larry Bird
exception, so named because the Boston Celtics were the first team permitted to
exceed the salary cap to re-sign one of their own players (in that case, Larry
Bird). Free agents who qualify for this exception are called "qualifying veteran
free agents" or "Bird Free Agents" in the CBA, and this exception falls under
the terms of the Veteran Free Agent exception. In essence, the Larry Bird
exception allows teams to exceed the salary cap to re-sign their own free
agents, at an amount up to the maximum salary. To qualify as a Bird free agent,
a player must have played three seasons without being waived or changing teams
as a free agent. Players claimed after being amnestied have their Bird rights
transferred to their new team. Other players claimed off waivers are not
eligible for the full Bird exception, but may qualify for the early Bird
exception. Prior to an arbitrator ruling in June 2012, all players that were
waived and changed teams lost their Bird rights. This means a player can obtain
"Bird rights" by playing under three one-year contracts, a single contract of at
least three years, or any combination thereof. It also means that when a player
is traded, his Bird rights are traded with him, and his new team can use the
Bird exception to re-sign him. Under the 2011 CBA, Bird-exception contracts can
be up to five years in length, down from six under the 2005 CBA.

The lesser form of the Larry Bird exception is the "early Bird" exception. Free
agents who qualify for this exception are called "early qualifying veteran free
agents", and qualify after playing two seasons with the same team. Players that
are traded or claimed off waivers have their Bird rights transferred to their
new team. Prior to an arbitrator ruling in June 2012, all players that were
waived and changed teams lost their Bird rights. Using this exception, a team
can re-sign its own free agent for either 175% of his salary the previous
season, or the NBA's average salary, whichever is greater. Early Bird contracts
must be for at least two seasons, but can last no longer than four seasons. If a
team agrees to a trade that would make a player lose his Early Bird Rights, he
has the power to veto the trade.

A much-publicized example for this was Devean George, who vetoed his inclusion
into a larger trade during the 2007–08 season that would have sent him from the
Dallas Mavericks to the New Jersey Nets.

Allows a team that is over the cap to acquire a replacement for a disabled
player who will be out for either the remainder of that season (for in-season
injuries/deaths) or the next season (if the disability occurs during the
offseason). The maximum salary of the replacement player is either 50% of the
injured player's salary, or the mid-level exception for a non-taxpaying team,
whichever is less. This exception requires an NBA-designated doctor to verify
the extent of the injury. Under the 2005 CBA, a team could sign a player under
this exception for five years; the 2011 CBA now allows this only for one year.

A player banned from the league for a drug-related offense who is reinstated may
be re-signed by his prior team for up to his previous salary.

There are two types of free agency under the NBA's Collective Bargaining
Agreement: Unrestricted and Restricted.

A restricted free agent is subject to his current team's Right of First Refusal,
meaning that the player can be signed to an offer sheet by another team, but his
current club reserves the right to match the offer and keep the player. An offer
sheet is a contract offer of at least two years made by another team to a
restricted free agent. The player's current club has three days to match the
offer or they lose the player to the new team; the CBA prior to 2011 allowed
seven days.

For first-round draft picks, restricted free agency is only allowed after a team
exercises its option for a fourth year, and the team makes a Qualifying Offer at
the Rookie-scale amount after the fourth year is completed. For any other player
to be a restricted free agent, he must be at most a three-year NBA veteran, and
his team must have made a Qualifying Offer for either 125% of his previous
season's salary or the minimum salary plus $200,000, whichever offer is higher.

Teams are limited in what they can offer an unrestricted free agent with two
years or less experience. The maximum first-year salary in an offer sheet is the
mid-level exception. The second-year salary can be raised a maximum of 4.5%. The
third year salary is limited to the maximum a team has available in their salary
cap. The salary in the fourth season may increase (or decrease) by up to 4.1% of
the salary in the third season. The offer sheet can only increase in the third
season if it provides the highest salary allowed in the first two seasons, the
contract is fully guaranteed, and it contains no bonuses. A player's original
team can use the Early Bird exception or their Mid-Level exception to re-sign
the player.

If the raise in the third season is greater than 4.5% of the first year, the
offering team must be able to fit the average of the entire contract under their
cap. Through the 2016–17 season, the accounting is different for the player's
original team, where the player's salary for a given year—not the contract's
average—is counted against the cap. In some cases, the offering team can exploit
a loophole to create what is referred to as a poison pill for the player's
original team, potentially forcing the original team to pay the luxury tax by
the third season, as the Houston Rockets did in order to sign Jeremy Lin and
Ömer Aşık away from the New York Knicks and Chicago Bulls, respectively. This
could discourage them from matching the offer sheet.

The 2017 CBA will change the accounting rules for the player's original team in
this scenario. If the original team matches, and has enough cap space to absorb
the average annual salary of the offer, it can choose to take cap hits of either
the actual contract payouts or the average of the contract in each season.

Before the 2005 CBA, the original team could only use an exception to re-sign a
player who had been drafted in the first round. The 2005 CBA allowed teams to
use exceptions on non-first-round picks, with the extension named the "Gilbert
Arenas Rule". In 2003, Gilbert Arenas, who had been a second-round pick in 2001,
signed a six-year, $60 million contract with the Washington Wizards after his
original team, the Golden State Warriors, were unable to match the offer since
they were over the salary cap.

Players on a team's season-ending roster remain under contract with their
respective team until the start of free agency on July 1. During a period in the
beginning of July, teams may begin negotiating with free agents, but trades
cannot be made and most free agents cannot be signed. The salary cap for the
upcoming year is not set until the league's audit is completed by the end of the
period. Contracts that are allowed during this period are limited to:

During the moratorium, teams are restricted from commenting on deals. Contracts
can be signed once the moratorium ends.

The end of a free agent's contract does not remove him from a team's cap
calculations. During the free agency period (from July 1 until the player signs
with a team, or the free agent's former team renounces its rights), each free
agent carries a specified salary cap charge for his last team, most often called
a "cap hold". Normally, the cap hold can be no more than a player's maximum
salary, or less than his minimum salary, based on years of service. The only
exception is for free agents who made the minimum salary in the previous season;
if the league reimbursed the team for a portion of his salary in the last season
of his contract, the reimbursement is not counted in the cap hold. Apart from
these restrictions, the cap hold varies based on the status of the free agent
and his salary in the previous season:

The 2017 CBA will increase some cap holds from those found in the 2011 CBA as
follows:

First-round draft choices are assigned salaries according to their draft
position. The first overall pick receives more than the second pick, the second
more than the third, and so on. Each contract is for two years, with a team
option for the third and fourth seasons (the previous CBA provided for
three-year contracts with an option for the fourth season), with built-in raises
every year to compensate for increases in the average salary. A team may elect
to exceed rookie scale for a drafted player that was unsigned for which they
retained his draft rights three seasons after the draft. The contract would be
for at least three seasons, with a maximum value up to the team's available cap
room.

Second-round picks are not subject to a scale, and technically can be paid
anywhere from the minimum to the maximum contract amount. In practice, they
rarely receive more than the minimum.

When a team initiates a sign-and-trade agreement, it must trade the signed
player immediately; teams cannot renege on the arrangement and keep the player
for themselves, using the other team's financial situation to leverage the
signee into a more favorable deal for themselves. Also, the contract signed
before the trade must be for at least 3 years, with the first year guaranteed.
Because of the contract length requirement, the signing team cannot use an
exception that cannot be used to offer a contract of 3 or more years.

Under the 2011 CBA, the signed player must have been on the roster of his
previous team at the end of the last regular season. Previous agreements allowed
teams to sign-and-trade any player to whom they held Bird rights, which do not
automatically disappear with a player's retirement—for example, in July 2012,
the Los Angeles Lakers still held Bird rights to John Salley, who had not played
since 2000. In the 2007–08 season, two teams used sign-and-trades on players who
had been out of the league. The Dallas Mavericks signed Keith Van Horn out of
retirement as part of a package to acquire Jason Kidd, and the Lakers did the
same with Aaron McKie to facilitate their deal for Pau Gasol.

The 2011 CBA puts further restrictions on sign-and-trades. Since the 2013–14
season, the payroll of the receiving team cannot exceed the so-called "apron",
currently set at $4 million above the tax threshold (set to rise to $6 million
following the 2017 CBA), as a result of the trade, and a team that has used the
taxpayers' MLE cannot receive a player in a sign-and-trade. Additionally, the
apron becomes a hard salary cap for the first season after the signing. Teams
above the apron before the trade cannot receive a player unless the trade leaves
the team below the apron.

The cap also includes a provision to close a potential loophole that would
provide incentives for teams to skirt the cap by signing an older player to a
long-term deal that would not end until after the team expects the player to
retire. Cap analyst Larry Coon outlined how this potential loophole would work:

To address this issue, the last several CBAs have included what is called the
"over-36 rule", under which certain contracts that extend past the player's 36th
birthday[b] are presumed to cover seasons following the player's expected
retirement. The salary for any years that come after the player's 36th birthday
is presumed to be deferred compensation, and is shifted for cap purposes to the
under-36 seasons of the deal, with the over-36 year(s) being referred to as
"zero years" in the CBA. If the player continues to play under the deal (proving
the presumption of retirement wrong), the salary that had originally been
treated as deferred is distributed evenly over the remaining years of the
contract, starting with the second season before the zero years. The over-36
rule had been a larger issue before the 2011 CBA, which limited the maximum
contract length to 5 years.

The 2017 CBA does not make any changes to the mechanics of the over-36 rule, but
changes the age at which the rule is triggered to 38. Notably, several members
of the union's executive committee at the time the 2017 CBA was negotiated were
older players who were seen as potential major beneficiaries of a change to an
over-38 rule. For example, the change to an over-38 rule will give union
president Chris Paul, scheduled to become a free agent after the 2016–17 season,
a potential gain of nearly $50 million over the life of his next contract.
Similarly, executive committee members LeBron James and Carmelo Anthony, who can
opt out of their current contracts after the same season, had the potential for
similar gains with this change.

The tight salary-matching rules of the 2005 CBA often required what NBA cap
analyst Larry Coon called "trade ballast"—extra players added to a deal solely
for salary matching, who would typically be waived by their new teams. Under
that CBA, such players were restricted from rejoining their original teams for
30 days during the season or 20 days in the offseason. This led to what Coon
called "wink-wink deals where players are traded with the full expectation of
returning later." A notable example of such a deal occurred in the 2009–10
season, in which the Cleveland Cavaliers included Zydrunas Ilgauskas in their
trade with the Washington Wizards for Antawn Jamison. Ilgauskas was waived a
week later without ever appearing in a game for the Wizards, and re-signed with
Cleveland after the 30-day waiting period passed. Under the 2011 CBA, a player
acquired in a trade and waived by his new team cannot re-sign with his original
team until one year after the trade or July 1 after the expiration of his
contract, whichever is sooner.

Certain players in the first few months of a new contract are subject to base
year compensation (BYC). The intent of BYC is to prevent teams from re-signing
players to salaries specifically targeted to match other salaries in a trade (in
other words, salary should be based on basketball value, not trade value). A BYC
player's trade value as outgoing salary is 50% of his new salary, or his
previous salary, whichever is greater. BYC applies only to players who re-sign
with their previous team and receive a raise greater than 20%. It also applies
only when (and as long as) the team is over the salary cap. Under the 2011 CBA,
players subject to BYC cannot be traded before January 15 except in a
sign-and-trade, and BYC is only applied to outgoing salary in sign-and-trade
deals.

Players waived after March 1 are not eligible to be on a team's playoff roster.
The deadline was March 23 during the lockout-shortened 2011–12 season.

Under the 2005 CBA, players and teams could alter the schedule of payments to
waived players by mutual agreement. The remaining guaranteed salary was equally
spread across the remaining years of the player's contract.

The 2011 CBA dramatically changes this regimen. While contracts signed under the
2005 CBA remain under the original scheme, different rules apply to new
contracts. When a team waives a player signed under the 2011 CBA, it can spread
the remaining guaranteed salary (and its accompanying cap hit) over twice the
remaining length of the contract, plus one year. According to Coon, "if a team
has an underperforming player with one season remaining at $12 million, the team
can waive him and stretch his salary across three seasons at $4 million per
season."

The NBA Amnesty Clause provided franchises a means of escaping a contractual
obligation to a player whose performance falls far short of the extremely large
salary they initially agreed to pay him. Under the 2010 Collective Bargaining
Agreement (CBA), each franchise is allowed to waive just one player prior to the
start of any season between the 2011–12 and 2015–16 seasons. The remaining
salary still contractually owed will not be included in the salary cap or luxury
tax totals of the team terminating his employment. Only players signed prior to
the 2011–12 season can be "amnestied". The clause can be exercised during the
seven days following the NBA's July moratorium period on player transactions.[c]
The clause's provisions allow a rival team to claim an amnestied player at a
significantly (often, dramatically) reduced salary; the waiving team only has to
pay the player the remaining balance. The team with the highest bid acquires the
player. If unclaimed, the player becomes a free agent. Teams over the salary cap
can only acquire an amnestied player if he becomes a free agent and the offer
would be limited to the veteran's minimum contract.

Under the 2005 CBA, one player could be waived prior to the start of the 2005–06
season and not count toward the luxury tax. Unlike the 2011 CBA, the player
still counted under the salary cap. The 2005 amnesty provision was derisively
named the "Allan Houston Rule", but his team, the New York Knicks, actually
didn't use the measure on Houston—they instead applied it to Jerome Williams due
to Allan Houston later retiring under medical circumstances the same season.
Ironically enough, Jerome Williams would retire as well from the NBA just two
days after being under the amnesty clause for the Knicks that season.

While most NBA teams hold contracts valued in excess of the salary cap, few
teams have payrolls at luxury tax levels. The tax threshold in 2005–06 was
$61.7 million. In 2005–06, the New York Knicks' payroll was $124 million,
putting them $74.5 million above the salary cap, and $62.3 million above the tax
line, which Knicks owner James Dolan paid to the league. Tax revenues are
normally redistributed evenly among non-tax-paying teams, so there is often a
several-million-dollar incentive to owners not to pay the luxury tax.

The luxury tax level for the 2008–09 season was $71.15 million. For the 2009–10
season, the luxury tax level was set at $69.92 million. The luxury tax level for
the 2010–11 and 2012–13 NBA seasons was $70,307,000.

The 2011 CBA instituted major changes to the luxury tax regime. The previous CBA
had a dollar-for-dollar tax provision system, which remained in effect through
the 2012–13 season. Teams exceeding the tax level were punished by being forced
to pay one dollar to the league for each dollar by which their payroll exceeded
the tax level. Starting in 2013–14, the tax changed to an incremental system.
Under the current system, tax is assessed at different levels based on the
amount that a team is over the luxury tax threshold. The scheme is not
cumulative—each level of tax applies only to amounts over that level's
threshold. For example, a team that is $8 million over the tax threshold will
pay $1.50 for each of its first $5 million over the tax threshold, and $1.75 per
dollar for the remaining $3 million. Starting in 2014–15, "repeat offenders",
subject to additional penalties, are defined as teams that paid tax in previous
seasons. In the first season, repeat offenders from in all previous three
seasons will pay a stiffer tax rate; from 2015–16 thereafter, teams paying taxes
in three out of four years will be subject to the higher repeater rate. As in
the previous CBA, the tax revenue is divided among teams with lower payrolls.
However, under the new scheme, no more than 50% of the total tax revenue can go
exclusively to teams that did not go over the cap. Initial reports did not
specify the use of the remaining 50% under the 2011 CBA, but it was later
confirmed that this amount would be used to fund revenue sharing for the season
during which tax was paid.

For the 2013–14 season, the luxury tax threshold was set at $71.748 million. The
Brooklyn Nets, whose payroll for that season was projected to be over $100
million, would face a luxury tax bill above $80 million, resulting in a total
payroll cost of $186 million.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Android_(operating_system)

Android is a mobile operating system developed by Google, based on the Linux
kernel and designed primarily for touchscreen mobile devices such as smartphones
and tablets. Android's user interface is mainly based on direct manipulation,
using touch gestures that loosely correspond to real-world actions, such as
swiping, tapping and pinching, to manipulate on-screen objects, along with a
virtual keyboard for text input. In addition to touchscreen devices, Google has
further developed Android TV for televisions, Android Auto for cars, and Android
Wear for wrist watches, each with a specialized user interface. Variants of
Android are also used on notebooks, game consoles, digital cameras, and other
electronics.

Initially developed by Android Inc., which Google bought in 2005, Android was
unveiled in 2007, along with the founding of the Open Handset Alliance – a
consortium of hardware, software, and telecommunication companies devoted to
advancing open standards for mobile devices. Beginning with the first commercial
Android device in September 2008, the operating system has gone through multiple
major releases, with the current version being 7.0 "Nougat", released in August
2016. Android applications ("apps") can be downloaded from the Google Play
store, which features over 2.7 million apps as of February 2017. Android has
been the best-selling OS on tablets since 2013, and runs on the vast majority[a]
of smartphones. In September 2015, Android had 1.4 billion monthly active users,
and it has the largest installed base of any operating system.

Android's source code is released by Google under an open source license,
although most Android devices ultimately ship with a combination of free and
open source and proprietary software, including proprietary software required
for accessing Google services. Android is popular with technology companies that
require a ready-made, low-cost and customizable operating system for high-tech
devices. Its open nature has encouraged a large community of developers and
enthusiasts to use the open-source code as a foundation for community-driven
projects, which deliver updates to older devices, add new features for advanced
users or bring Android to devices originally shipped with other operating
systems. The success of Android has made security an issue, in which the
majority of Android devices do not receive security patches, and it has become a
target for patent and copyright litigation as part of the so-called "smartphone
wars" between technology companies.

Android Inc. was founded in Palo Alto, California in October 2003 by Andy Rubin,
Rich Miner, Nick Sears, and Chris White. Rubin described the Android project as
"tremendous potential in developing smarter mobile devices that are more aware
of its owner's location and preferences". The early intentions of the company
were to develop an advanced operating system for digital cameras. Though, when
it was realized that the market for the devices was not large enough, the
company diverted its efforts toward producing a smartphone operating system that
would rival Symbian and Microsoft Windows Mobile. Despite the past
accomplishments of the founders and early employees, Android Inc. operated
secretly, revealing only that it was working on software for mobile phones. That
same year, Rubin ran out of money. Steve Perlman, a close friend of Rubin,
brought him $10,000 in cash in an envelope and refused a stake in the company.

In July 2005, Google acquired Android Inc. for at least $50 million. Its key
employees, including Rubin, Miner and White, joined Google as part of the
acquisition. Not much was known about Android at the time, with Rubin having
only stated that they were "making software for mobile phones". At Google, the
team led by Rubin developed a mobile device platform powered by the Linux
kernel. Google marketed the platform to handset makers and carriers on the
promise of providing a flexible, upgradeable system. Google had "lined up a
series of hardware components and software partners and signaled to carriers
that it was open to various degrees of cooperation".

Speculation about Google's intention to enter the mobile communications market
continued to build through December 2006. An early prototype had a close
resemblance to a BlackBerry phone, with no touchscreen and a physical QWERTY
keyboard, but the arrival of 2007's Apple iPhone meant that Android "had to go
back to the drawing board". Google later changed its Android specification
documents to state that "Touchscreens will be supported", although "the Product
was designed with the presence of discrete physical buttons as an assumption,
therefore a touchscreen cannot completely replace physical buttons". In
September 2007, InformationWeek covered an Evalueserve study reporting that
Google had filed several patent applications in the area of mobile telephony.

On November 5, 2007, the Open Handset Alliance, a consortium of technology
companies including Google, device manufacturers such as HTC, Motorola and
Samsung, wireless carriers such as Sprint and T-Mobile, and chipset makers such
as Qualcomm and Texas Instruments, unveiled itself, with a goal to develop "the
first truly open and comprehensive platform for mobile devices". The first
commercially available smartphone running Android was the HTC Dream, also known
as T-Mobile G1, announced on September 23, 2008.

Since 2008, Android has seen numerous updates which have incrementally improved
the operating system, adding new features and fixing bugs in previous releases.
Each major release is named in alphabetical order after a dessert or sugary
treat, with the first few Android versions being called "Cupcake", "Donut",
"Eclair", and "Froyo", respectively. During its announcement of Android KitKat
in 2013, Google explained that "Since these devices make our lives so sweet,
each Android version is named after a dessert", although a Google spokesperson
told CNN in an interview that "It’s kind of like an internal team thing, and we
prefer to be a little bit — how should I say — a bit inscrutable in the matter,
I’ll say".

In 2010, Google launched its Nexus series of devices, a lineup in which Google
partnered with different device manufacturers to produce new devices and
introduce new Android versions. The series was described as having "played a
pivotal role in Android's history by introducing new software iterations and
hardware standards across the board", and became known for its "bloat-free"
software with "timely [...] updates". At its developer conference in May 2013,
Google announced a special version of the Samsung Galaxy S4, where, instead of
using Samsung's own Android customization, the phone ran "stock Android" and was
promised to receive new system updates fast. The device would become the start
of the Google Play edition program, and was followed by other devices, including
the HTC One Google Play edition, and Moto G Google Play edition. In 2015, Ars
Technica wrote that "Earlier this week, the last of the Google Play edition
Android phones in Google's online storefront were listed as "no longer available
for sale"" and that "Now they're all gone, and it looks a whole lot like the
program has wrapped up".

From 2008 to 2013, Hugo Barra served as product spokesperson, representing
Android at press conferences and Google I/O, Google’s annual developer-focused
conference. He left Google in August 2013 to join Chinese phone maker Xiaomi.
Less than six months earlier, Google's then-CEO Larry Page announced in a blog
post that Andy Rubin had moved from the Android division to take on new projects
at Google, and that Sundar Pichai would become the new Android lead. Pichai
himself would eventually switch positions, becoming the new CEO of Google in
August 2015 following the company's restructure into the Alphabet conglomerate,
making Hiroshi Lockheimer the new head of Android.

In June 2014, Google announced Android One, a set of "hardware reference models"
that would "allow [device makers] to easily create high-quality phones at low
costs", designed for consumers in developing countries. In September, Google
announced the first set of Android One phones for release in India. However,
Recode reported in June 2015 that the project was "a disappointment", citing
"reluctant consumers and manufacturing partners" and "misfires from the search
company that has never quite cracked hardware". Plans to relaunch Android One
surfaced in August 2015, with Africa announced as the next location for the
program a week later. A report from The Information in January 2017 stated that
Google was "expanding its “Android One” program for low-cost smartphones to the
U.S in coming months".

Google introduced the Pixel and Pixel XL smartphones in October 2016, marketed
as being the first phones made by Google, and exclusively featured certain
software features, such as the Google Assistant, before wider rollout. The Pixel
phones replaced the Nexus series, and Rick Osterloh, Google's senior vice
president of hardware, confirmed in March 2017 that a sequel to the Pixel is
coming later in 2017.

Android's default user interface is mainly based on direct manipulation, using
touch inputs that loosely correspond to real-world actions, like swiping,
tapping, pinching, and reverse pinching to manipulate on-screen objects, along
with a virtual keyboard. Game controllers and full-size physical keyboards are
supported via Bluetooth or USB. The response to user input is designed to be
immediate and provides a fluid touch interface, often using the vibration
capabilities of the device to provide haptic feedback to the user. Internal
hardware, such as accelerometers, gyroscopes and proximity sensors are used by
some applications to respond to additional user actions, for example adjusting
the screen from portrait to landscape depending on how the device is oriented,
or allowing the user to steer a vehicle in a racing game by rotating the device,
simulating control of a steering wheel.

Android devices boot to the homescreen, the primary navigation and information
"hub" on Android devices, analogous to the desktop found on personal computers.
Android homescreens are typically made up of app icons and widgets; app icons
launch the associated app, whereas widgets display live, auto-updating content,
such as a weather forecast, the user's email inbox, or a news ticker directly on
the homescreen. A homescreen may be made up of several pages, between which the
user can swipe back and forth. Third-party apps available on Google Play and
other app stores can extensively re-theme the homescreen, and even mimic the
look of other operating systems, such as Windows Phone. Most manufacturers
customize the look and features of their Android devices to differentiate
themselves from their competitors.

Along the top of the screen is a status bar, showing information about the
device and its connectivity. This status bar can be "pulled" down to reveal a
notification screen where apps display important information or updates.
Notifications are "short, timely, and relevant information about your app when
it’s not in use", and when tapped, users are directed to a screen inside the app
relating to the notification. Beginning with Android 4.1 "Jelly Bean",
"expandable notifications" allow the user to tap an icon on the notification in
order for it to expand and display more information and possible app actions
right from the notification.

An All Apps screen lists all installed applications, with the ability for users
to drag an app from the list onto the home screen. A Recents screen lets users
switch between recently used apps.

Applications ("apps"), which extend the functionality of devices, are written
using the Android software development kit (SDK) and, often, the Java
programming language. Java may be combined with C/C++, together with a choice of
non-default runtimes that allow better C++ support. The Go programming language
is also supported, although with a limited set of application programming
interfaces (API).

The SDK includes a comprehensive set of development tools, including a debugger,
software libraries, a handset emulator based on QEMU, documentation, sample
code, and tutorials. Initially, Google's supported integrated development
environment (IDE) was Eclipse using the Android Development Tools (ADT) plugin;
in December 2014, Google released Android Studio, based on IntelliJ IDEA, as its
primary IDE for Android application development. Other development tools are
available, including a native development kit (NDK) for applications or
extensions in C or C++, Google App Inventor, a visual environment for novice
programmers, and various cross platform mobile web applications frameworks. In
January 2014, Google unveiled an framework based on Apache Cordova for porting
Chrome HTML 5 web applications to Android, wrapped in a native application
shell.

Android has a growing selection of third-party applications, which can be
acquired by users by downloading and installing the application's APK (Android
application package) file, or by downloading them using an application store
program that allows users to install, update, and remove applications from their
devices. Google Play Store is the primary application store installed on Android
devices that comply with Google's compatibility requirements and license the
Google Mobile Services software. Google Play Store allows users to browse,
download and update applications published by Google and third-party developers;
as of July 2013[update], there are more than one million applications available
for Android in Play Store. As of July 2013[update], 50 billion applications have
been installed. Some carriers offer direct carrier billing for Google Play
application purchases, where the cost of the application is added to the user's
monthly bill.

Due to the open nature of Android, a number of third-party application
marketplaces also exist for Android, either to provide a substitute for devices
that are not allowed to ship with Google Play Store, provide applications that
cannot be offered on Google Play Store due to policy violations, or for other
reasons. Examples of these third-party stores have included the Amazon Appstore,
GetJar, and SlideMe. F-Droid, another alternative marketplace, seeks to only
provide applications that are distributed under free and open source licenses.

Since Android devices are usually battery-powered, Android is designed to manage
processes to keep power consumption at a minimum. When an application is not in
use the system suspends its operation so that, while available for immediate use
rather than closed, it does not use battery power or CPU resources. Android
manages the applications stored in memory automatically: when memory is low, the
system will begin invisibly and automatically closing inactive processes,
starting with those that have been inactive for longest. Lifehacker reported in
2011 that third-party task killers were doing more harm than good.

At Google I/O on May 2016, Google announced Daydream, a virtual reality platform
that relies on a smartphone and provides VR capabilities through a virtual
reality headset and controller designed by Google itself. The platform is built
into Android starting with Android Nougat, differentiating from standalone
support for VR capabilities. The software is available for developers, and was
released in 2016.

The main hardware platform for Android is the ARM (ARMv7 and ARMv8-A
architectures), with x86, MIPS and MIPS64, and x86-64 architectures also
officially supported in later versions of Android. The unofficial Android-x86
project provided support for the x86 architectures ahead of the official
support. MIPS architecture was also supported before Google did. Since 2012,
Android devices with Intel processors began to appear, including phones and
tablets. While gaining support for 64-bit platforms, Android was first made to
run on 64-bit x86 and then on ARM64. Since Android 5.0 "Lollipop", 64-bit
variants of all platforms are supported in addition to the 32-bit variants.

Requirements for the minimum amount of RAM for devices running Android 5.1 range
from 512 MB of RAM for normal-density screens, to about 1.8 GB for high-density
screens. The recommendation for Android 4.4 is to have at least 512 MB of RAM,
while for "low RAM" devices 340 MB is the required minimum amount that does not
include memory dedicated to various hardware components such as the baseband
processor. Android 4.4 requires a 32-bit ARMv7, MIPS or x86 architecture
processor (latter two through unofficial ports), together with an OpenGL ES 2.0
compatible graphics processing unit (GPU). Android supports OpenGL ES 1.1, 2.0,
3.0, 3.1 and as of latest major version, 3.2 and Vulkan. Some applications may
explicitly require a certain version of the OpenGL ES, and suitable GPU hardware
is required to run such applications.

Android devices incorporate many optional hardware components, including still
or video cameras, GPS, orientation sensors, dedicated gaming controls,
accelerometers, gyroscopes, barometers, magnetometers, proximity sensors,
pressure sensors, thermometers, and touchscreens. Some hardware components are
not required, but became standard in certain classes of devices, such as
smartphones, and additional requirements apply if they are present. Some other
hardware was initially required, but those requirements have been relaxed or
eliminated altogether. For example, as Android was developed initially as a
phone OS, hardware such as microphones were required, while over time the phone
function became optional. Android used to require an autofocus camera, which was
relaxed to a fixed-focus camera if present at all, since the camera was dropped
as a requirement entirely when Android started to be used on set-top boxes.

In addition to running on smartphones and tablets, several vendors run Android
natively on regular PC hardware with a keyboard and mouse. In addition to their
availability on commercially available hardware, similar PC hardware-friendly
versions of Android are freely available from the Android-x86 project, including
customized Android 4.4. Using the Android emulator that is part of the Android
SDK, or by using BlueStacks or Andy, Android can also run non-natively on x86.
Chinese companies are building a PC and mobile operating system, based on
Android, to "compete directly with Microsoft Windows and Google Android". The
Chinese Academy of Engineering noted that "more than a dozen" companies were
customising Android following a Chinese ban on the use of Windows 8 on
government PCs.

Android is developed by Google until the latest changes and updates are ready to
be released, at which point the source code is made available to the Android
Open Source Project. This source code can be found without modification on
select devices, mainly the Nexus series of devices. The source code is, in turn,
adapted by original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) to run on their hardware.
Android's source code does not contain the often proprietary device drivers that
are needed for certain hardware components.

In 2007, the green Android logo was designed for Google by graphic designer
Irina Blok. The design team was tasked with a project to create a universally
identifiable icon with the specific inclusion of a robot in the final design.
After numerous design developments based on science fiction and space movies,
the team eventually sought inspiration from the human symbol on restroom doors
and modified the figure into a robot shape. As Android is open-source, it was
agreed that the logo should be likewise, and since its launch the green logo has
been reinterpreted into countless variations on the original design.

Google announces major incremental upgrades to Android on a yearly basis. The
updates can be installed on devices over-the-air. The latest major release is
7.0 "Nougat", announced in March 2016, and released the following August.

Compared to its primary rival mobile operating system, Apple's iOS, Android
updates typically reach various devices with significant delays. Except for
devices with the Google Nexus brand, updates often arrive months after the
release of the new version, or not at all. This is partly due to the extensive
variation in hardware in Android devices, to which each upgrade must be
specifically tailored, a time- and resource-consuming process. Manufacturers
often prioritize their newest devices and leave old ones behind. Additional
delays can be introduced by wireless carriers who, after receiving updates from
manufacturers, further customize and brand Android to their needs and conduct
extensive testing on their networks before sending the upgrade out to users.

The lack of after-sale support from manufacturers and carriers has been widely
criticized by consumer groups and the technology media. Some commentators have
noted that the industry has a financial incentive not to upgrade their devices,
as the lack of updates for existing devices fuels the purchase of newer ones, an
attitude described as "insulting". The Guardian complained that the method of
distribution for updates is complicated only because manufacturers and carriers
have designed it that way. In 2011, Google partnered with a number of industry
players to announce an "Android Update Alliance", pledging to deliver timely
updates for every device for 18 months after its release; however, there has not
been another official word about that alliance since its announcement.

In 2012, Google began decoupling certain aspects of the operating system
(particularly its core applications) so they could be updated through the Google
Play store independently of the OS. One of those components, Google Play
Services, is a closed-source system-level process providing APIs for Google
services, installed automatically on nearly all devices running Android 2.2
"Froyo" and higher. With these changes, Google can add new system functionality
through Play Services and update apps without having to distribute an upgrade to
the operating system itself. As a result, Android 4.2 and 4.3 "Jelly Bean"
contained relatively fewer user-facing changes, focusing more on minor changes
and platform improvements.

In May 2016, Bloomberg reported that Google was making efforts to keep Android
more up-to-date, including accelerated rates of security updates, rolling out
technological workarounds, reducing requirements for phone testing, and ranking
phone makers in an attempt to "shame" them into better behavior. As stated by
Bloomberg: "As smartphones get more capable, complex and hackable, having the
latest software work closely with the hardware is increasingly important".
Hiroshi Lockheimer, the Android lead, admitted that "It’s not an ideal
situation", further commenting that the lack of updates is "the weakest link on
security on Android". Wireless carriers were described in the report as the
"most challenging discussions", due to carriers' slow approval time due to
testing on their networks, despite some carriers, including Verizon and Sprint,
having already shortened their respective approval times. HTC's then-executive
Jason Mackenzie called monthly security updates "unrealistic" in 2015, and
Google was trying to persuade carriers to exclude security patches from the full
testing procedures. In a further effort for persuasion, Google shared a list of
top phone makers measured by updated devices with its Android partners, and is
considering making the list public. Mike Chan, co-founder of phone maker Nextbit
and former Android developer, said that "The best way to solve this problem is a
massive re-architecture of the operating system", "or Google could invest in
training manufacturers and carriers "to be good Android citizens"".

Android's kernel is based on one of the Linux kernel's long-term support (LTS)
branches. Since April 2014, Android devices mainly use versions 3.4, 3.10 or
3.18 of the Linux kernel. The specific kernel version depends on the actual
Android device and its hardware platform; Android has used various kernel
versions since the version 2.6.25 that was used in Android 1.0.

Android's variant of the Linux kernel has further architectural changes that are
implemented by Google outside the typical Linux kernel development cycle, such
as the inclusion of components like Binder, ashmem, pmem, logger, wakelocks, and
different out-of-memory (OOM) handling. Certain features that Google contributed
back to the Linux kernel, notably a power management feature called "wakelocks",
were rejected by mainline kernel developers partly because they felt that Google
did not show any intent to maintain its own code. Google announced in April 2010
that they would hire two employees to work with the Linux kernel community, but
Greg Kroah-Hartman, the current Linux kernel maintainer for the stable branch,
said in December 2010 that he was concerned that Google was no longer trying to
get their code changes included in mainstream Linux. Some Google Android
developers hinted that "the Android team was getting fed up with the process,"
because they were a small team and had more urgent work to do on Android.

In August 2011, Linus Torvalds said that "eventually Android and Linux would
come back to a common kernel, but it will probably not be for four to five
years". In December 2011, Greg Kroah-Hartman announced the start of Android
Mainlining Project, which aims to put some Android drivers, patches and features
back into the Linux kernel, starting in Linux 3.3. Linux included the autosleep
and wakelocks capabilities in the 3.5 kernel, after many previous attempts at
merger. The interfaces are the same but the upstream Linux implementation allows
for two different suspend modes: to memory (the traditional suspend that Android
uses), and to disk (hibernate, as it is known on the desktop). Google maintains
a public code repository that contains their experimental work to re-base
Android off the latest stable Linux versions.

The flash storage on Android devices is split into several partitions, such as
/system for the operating system itself, and /data for user data and application
installations. In contrast to desktop Linux distributions, Android device owners
are not given root access to the operating system and sensitive partitions such
as /system are read-only. However, root access can be obtained by exploiting
security flaws in Android, which is used frequently by the open-source community
to enhance the capabilities of their devices, but also by malicious parties to
install viruses and malware.

Android is a Linux distribution according to the Linux Foundation, Google's
open-source chief Chris DiBona, and several journalists. Others, such as Google
engineer Patrick Brady, say that Android is not Linux in the traditional
Unix-like Linux distribution sense; Android does not include the GNU C Library
(it uses Bionic as an alternative C library) and some of other components
typically found in Linux distributions.

On top of the Linux kernel, there are the middleware, libraries and APIs written
in C, and application software running on an application framework which
includes Java-compatible libraries. Development of the Linux kernel continues
independently of other Android's source code bases.

Until version 5.0, Android used Dalvik as a process virtual machine with
trace-based just-in-time (JIT) compilation to run Dalvik "dex-code" (Dalvik
Executable), which is usually translated from the Java bytecode. Following the
trace-based JIT principle, in addition to interpreting the majority of
application code, Dalvik performs the compilation and native execution of select
frequently executed code segments ("traces") each time an application is
launched. Android 4.4 introduced Android Runtime (ART) as a new runtime
environment, which uses ahead-of-time (AOT) compilation to entirely compile the
application bytecode into machine code upon the installation of an application.
In Android 4.4, ART was an experimental feature and not enabled by default; it
became the only runtime option in the next major version of Android, 5.0.

For its Java library, the Android platform uses a subset of the now discontinued
Apache Harmony project. In December 2015, Google announced that the next version
of Android would switch to a Java implementation based on OpenJDK.

Android's standard C library, Bionic, was developed by Google specifically for
Android, as a derivation of the BSD's standard C library code. Bionic itself has
been designed with several major features specific to the Linux kernel. The main
benefits of using Bionic instead of the GNU C Library (glibc) or uClibc are its
smaller runtime footprint, and optimization for low-frequency CPUs. At the same
time, Bionic is licensed under the terms of the BSD licence, which Google finds
more suitable for the Android's overall licensing model.

Aiming for a different licensing model, toward the end of 2012, Google switched
the Bluetooth stack in Android from the GPL-licensed BlueZ to the
Apache-licensed BlueDroid.

Android does not have a native X Window System by default, nor does it support
the full set of standard GNU libraries. This made it difficult to port existing
Linux applications or libraries to Android, until version r5 of the Android
Native Development Kit brought support for applications written completely in C
or C++. Libraries written in C may also be used in applications by injection of
a small shim and usage of the JNI.

Since Marshmallow, "Toybox", a collection of command line utilities (mostly for
use by apps, as Android doesn't provide a command line interface by default),
replaced similar "Toolbox" collection.

Android has another operating system, Trusty OS, within it, as a part of
"Trusty" "software components supporting a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE)
on mobile devices." "Trusty and the Trusty API are subject to change. [..]
Applications for the Trusty OS can be written in C/C++ (C++ support is limited),
and they have access to a small C library. [..] All Trusty applications are
single-threaded; multithreading in Trusty userspace currently is unsupported.
[..] Third-party application development is not supported in" the current
version, and software running on the OS and processor for it, run the "DRM
framework for protected content. [..] There are many other uses for a TEE such
as mobile payments, secure banking, full-disk encryption, multi-factor
authentication, device reset protection, replay-protected persistent storage,
wireless display ("cast") of protected content, secure PIN and fingerprint
processing, and even malware detection."

Android has an active community of developers and enthusiasts who use the
Android Open Source Project (AOSP) source code to develop and distribute their
own modified versions of the operating system. These community-developed
releases often bring new features and updates to devices faster than through the
official manufacturer/carrier channels, with a comparable level of quality;
provide continued support for older devices that no longer receive official
updates; or bring Android to devices that were officially released running other
operating systems, such as the HP TouchPad. Community releases often come
pre-rooted and contain modifications not provided by the original vendor, such
as the ability to overclock or over/undervolt the device's processor.
CyanogenMod was the most widely used community firmware, and CyanogenMod has
been discontinued and LineageOS is the successor of CyanogenMod l Android-x86 is
a version of Android for IBM PC compatibles. There have also been attempts with
varying degrees of success to port Android to iPhones, notably the iDroid
Project.

Historically, device manufacturers and mobile carriers have typically been
unsupportive of third-party firmware development. Manufacturers express concern
about improper functioning of devices running unofficial software and the
support costs resulting from this. Moreover, modified firmwares such as
CyanogenMod sometimes offer features, such as tethering, for which carriers
would otherwise charge a premium. As a result, technical obstacles including
locked bootloaders and restricted access to root permissions are common in many
devices. However, as community-developed software has grown more popular, and
following a statement by the Librarian of Congress in the United States that
permits the "jailbreaking" of mobile devices, manufacturers and carriers have
softened their position regarding third party development, with some, including
HTC, Motorola, Samsung and Sony, providing support and encouraging development.
As a result of this, over time the need to circumvent hardware restrictions to
install unofficial firmware has lessened as an increasing number of devices are
shipped with unlocked or unlockable bootloaders, similar to Nexus series of
phones, although usually requiring that users waive their devices' warranties to
do so. However, despite manufacturer acceptance, some carriers in the US still
require that phones are locked down, frustrating developers and customers.

As part of the broader 2013 mass surveillance disclosures it was revealed in
September 2013 that the American and British intelligence agencies, the National
Security Agency (NSA) and Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ),
respectively, have access to the user data on iPhone, BlackBerry, and Android
devices. They are reportedly able to read almost all smartphone information,
including SMS, location, emails, and notes. In January 2014, further reports
revealed the intelligence agencies' capabilities to intercept the personal
information transmitted across the Internet by social networks and other popular
applications such as Angry Birds, which collect personal information of their
users for advertising and other commercial reasons. GCHQ has, according to The
Guardian, a wiki-style guide of different apps and advertising networks, and the
different data that can be siphoned from each. Later that week, the Finnish
Angry Birds developer Rovio announced that it was reconsidering its
relationships with its advertising platforms in the light of these revelations,
and called upon the wider industry to do the same.

The documents revealed a further effort by the intelligence agencies to
intercept Google Maps searches and queries submitted from Android and other
smartphones to collect location information in bulk. The NSA and GCHQ insist
their activities are in compliance with all relevant domestic and international
laws, although the Guardian stated "the latest disclosures could also add to
mounting public concern about how the technology sector collects and uses
information, especially for those outside the US, who enjoy fewer privacy
protections than Americans."

Research from security company Trend Micro lists premium service abuse as the
most common type of Android malware, where text messages are sent from infected
phones to premium-rate telephone numbers without the consent or even knowledge
of the user. Other malware displays unwanted and intrusive advertisements on the
device, or sends personal information to unauthorised third parties. Security
threats on Android are reportedly growing exponentially; however, Google
engineers have argued that the malware and virus threat on Android is being
exaggerated by security companies for commercial reasons, and have accused the
security industry of playing on fears to sell virus protection software to
users. Google maintains that dangerous malware is actually extremely rare, and a
survey conducted by F-Secure showed that only 0.5% of Android malware reported
had come from the Google Play store.

In August 2015, Google announced that devices in the Google Nexus series would
begin to receive monthly security patches. Google also wrote that "Nexus devices
will continue to receive major updates for at least two years and security
patches for the longer of three years from initial availability or 18 months
from last sale of the device via the Google Store." The following October,
researchers at the University of Cambridge concluded that 87.7% of Android
phones in use had known but unpatched security vulnerabilities due to lack of
updates and support. Ron Amadeo of Ars Technica wrote also in August 2015 that
"Android was originally designed, above all else, to be widely adopted. Google
was starting from scratch with zero percent market share, so it was happy to
give up control and give everyone a seat at the table in exchange for adoption.
[...] Now, though, Android has around 75-80 percent of the worldwide smartphone
market—making it not just the world's most popular mobile operating system but
arguably the most popular operating system, period. As such, security has become
a big issue. Android still uses a software update chain-of-command designed back
when the Android ecosystem had zero devices to update, and it just doesn't
work". Following news of Google's monthly schedule, some manufacturers,
including Samsung and LG, promised to issue monthly security updates, but, as
noted by Jerry Hildenbrand in Android Central in February 2016, "instead we got
a few updates on specific versions of a small handful of models. And a bunch of
broken promises".

Patches to bugs found in the core operating system often do not reach users of
older and lower-priced devices. However, the open-source nature of Android
allows security contractors to take existing devices and adapt them for highly
secure uses. For example, Samsung has worked with General Dynamics through their
Open Kernel Labs acquisition to rebuild Jelly Bean on top of their hardened
microvisor for the "Knox" project.

Android smartphones have the ability to report the location of Wi-Fi access
points, encountered as phone users move around, to build databases containing
the physical locations of hundreds of millions of such access points. These
databases form electronic maps to locate smartphones, allowing them to run apps
like Foursquare, Google Latitude, Facebook Places, and to deliver location-based
ads. Third party monitoring software such as TaintDroid, an academic
research-funded project, can, in some cases, detect when personal information is
being sent from applications to remote servers.

Android applications run in a sandbox, an isolated area of the system that does
not have access to the rest of the system's resources, unless access permissions
are explicitly granted by the user when the application is installed.

Since 2012, a "Verify Apps" feature scans apps for malicious behavior.
Originally only doing so during installation, Verify Apps received an update in
2014 to "constantly" scan apps, and in 2017 the feature was made visible to
users through a menu in Settings.

Before installing an application, the Google Play store displays a list of the
requirements an app needs to function. After reviewing these permissions, the
user can choose to accept or refuse them, installing the application only if
they accept. In Android 6.0 "Marshmallow", the permissions system was changed;
apps are no longer automatically granted all of their specified permissions at
installation time. An opt-in system is used instead, in which users are prompted
to grant or deny individual permissions to an app when they are needed for the
first time. Applications remember the grants, which can be revoked by the user
at any time. The new permissions model is used only by applications developed
for Marshmallow using its software development kit (SDK), and older apps will
continue to use the previous all-or-nothing approach. Permissions can still be
revoked for those apps, though this might prevent them from working properly,
and a warning is displayed to that effect.

Google uses Google Bouncer malware scanner to watch over and scan applications
available in the Google Play Store. It is intended to flag suspicious apps and
warn users of any potential threat with an application before they download it.
Android version 4.2 Jelly Bean was released in 2012, with enhanced security
features, including a malware scanner built into the system, which works in
combination with Google Play but can scan apps installed from third party
sources as well, and an alert system which notifies the user when an app tries
to send a premium-rate text message, blocking the message unless the user
explicitly authorises it. Several security firms, such as Lookout Mobile
Security, AVG Technologies, and McAfee, have released antivirus software for
Android devices. This software is ineffective as sandboxing also applies to such
applications, limiting their ability to scan the deeper system for threats.

In August 2013, Google announced Android Device Manager, a website that allows
users to remotely track, locate, and wipe their Android device, with an Android
app for the service released in December.

The source code for Android is open-source: it is developed in private by
Google, with the source code released publicly when a new version of Android is
released. Google publishes most of the code (including network and telephony
stacks) under the non-copyleft Apache License version 2.0. which allows
modification and redistribution. The license does not grant rights to the
"Android" trademark, so device manufacturers and wireless carriers have to
license it from Google under individual contracts. Associated Linux kernel
changes are released under the copyleft GNU General Public License version 2,
developed by the Open Handset Alliance, with the source code publicly available
at all times. Typically, Google collaborates with a hardware manufacturer to
produce a flagship device (part of the Nexus series) featuring the new version
of Android, then makes the source code available after that device has been
released. The only Android release which was not immediately made available as
source code was the tablet-only 3.0 Honeycomb release. The reason, according to
Andy Rubin in an official Android blog post, was because Honeycomb was rushed
for production of the Motorola Xoom, and they did not want third parties
creating a "really bad user experience" by attempting to put onto smartphones a
version of Android intended for tablets.

Only the base Android operating system (including some applications) is
open-source software, whereas most Android devices ship with a substantial
amount of proprietary software, such as Google Mobile Services, which includes
applications such as Google Play Store, Google Search, and Google Play
Services – a software layer that provides APIs for the integration with
Google-provided services, among others. These applications must be licensed from
Google by device makers, and can only be shipped on devices which meet its
compatibility guidelines and other requirements. Custom, certified distributions
of Android produced by manufacturers (such as TouchWiz and HTC Sense) may also
replace certain stock Android apps with their own proprietary variants and add
additional software not included in the stock Android operating system. There
may also be "binary blob" drivers required for certain hardware components in
the device.

Some stock applications in AOSP code that were formerly used by earlier versions
of Android, such as Search, Music, and Calendar, have been abandoned by Google
in favor of non-free replacements distributed through Play Store (Google Search,
Google Play Music, and Google Calendar) that are no longer open-source.
Moreover, open-source variants of some applications also exclude functions that
are present in their non-free versions, such as Photosphere panoramas in Camera,
and a Google Now page on the default home screen (exclusive to the proprietary
version "Google Now Launcher", whose code is embedded within that of the main
Google application).

Richard Stallman and the Free Software Foundation have been critical of Android
and have recommended the usage of alternatives such as Replicant, because
drivers and firmware vital for the proper functioning of Android devices are
usually proprietary, and because the Google Play Store application can forcibly
install or deinstall applications and, as a result, invite non-free software.
although the Free Software Foundation has not found Google to use it for
malicious reasons

Google licenses their Google Mobile Services software, along with Android
trademarks, only to hardware manufacturers for devices that meet Google's
compatibility standards specified in the Android Compatibility Program document.
Thus, forks of Android that make major changes to the operating system itself do
not include any of Google's non-free components, stay incompatible with
applications that require them, and must ship with an alternative software
marketplace in lieu of Google Play Store. Examples of such Android forks are
Amazon's Fire OS (which is used on the Kindle Fire line of tablets, and oriented
toward Amazon services), the Nokia X Software Platform (a fork used by the Nokia
X family, oriented primarily toward Nokia and Microsoft services), and other
forks that exclude Google apps due to the general unavailability of Google
services in certain regions (such as China). In 2014, Google also began to
require that all Android devices which license the Google Mobile Services
software display a prominent "Powered by Android" logo on their boot screens.

Members of the Open Handset Alliance, which include the majority of Android
OEMs, are also contractually forbidden from producing Android devices based on
forks of the OS; in 2012, Acer Inc. was forced by Google to halt production on a
device powered by Alibaba Group's Aliyun OS with threats of removal from the
OHA, as Google deemed the platform to be an incompatible version of Android.
Alibaba Group defended the allegations, arguing that the OS was a distinct
platform from Android (primarily using HTML5 apps), but incorporated portions of
Android's platform to allow backwards compatibility with third-party Android
software. Indeed, the devices did ship with an application store which offered
Android apps; however, the majority of them were pirated.

Android received a lukewarm reaction when it was unveiled in 2007. Although
analysts were impressed with the respected technology companies that had
partnered with Google to form the Open Handset Alliance, it was unclear whether
mobile phone manufacturers would be willing to replace their existing operating
systems with Android. The idea of an open-source, Linux-based development
platform sparked interest, but there were additional worries about Android
facing strong competition from established players in the smartphone market,
such as Nokia and Microsoft, and rival Linux mobile operating systems that were
in development. These established players were skeptical: Nokia was quoted as
saying "we don't see this as a threat," and a member of Microsoft's Windows
Mobile team stated "I don't understand the impact that they are going to have."

Since then Android has grown to become the most widely used smartphone operating
system and "one of the fastest mobile experiences available." Reviewers have
highlighted the open-source nature of the operating system as one of its
defining strengths, allowing companies such as Nokia (Nokia X family), Amazon
(Kindle Fire), Barnes & Noble (Nook), Ouya, Baidu and others to fork the
software and release hardware running their own customised version of Android.
As a result, it has been described by technology website Ars Technica as
"practically the default operating system for launching new hardware" for
companies without their own mobile platforms. This openness and flexibility is
also present at the level of the end user: Android allows extensive
customisation of devices by their owners and apps are freely available from
non-Google app stores and third party websites. These have been cited as among
the main advantages of Android phones over others.

Despite Android's popularity, including an activation rate three times that of
iOS, there have been reports that Google has not been able to leverage their
other products and web services successfully to turn Android into the money
maker that analysts had expected. The Verge suggested that Google is losing
control of Android due to the extensive customization and proliferation of
non-Google apps and services – Amazon's Kindle Fire line uses Fire OS, a heavily
modified fork of Android which does not include or support any of Google's
proprietary components, and requires that users obtain software from its
competing Amazon Appstore instead of Play Store. In 2014, in an effort to
improve prominence of the Android brand, Google began to require that devices
featuring its proprietary components display an Android logo on the boot screen.

Android has suffered from "fragmentation", a situation where the variety of
Android devices, in terms of both hardware variations and differences in the
software running on them, makes the task of developing applications that work
consistently across the ecosystem harder than rival platforms such as iOS where
hardware and software varies less. For example, according to data from
OpenSignal in July 2013, there were 11,868 models of Android device, numerous
different screen sizes and eight Android OS versions simultaneously in use,
while the large majority of iOS users have upgraded to the latest iteration of
that OS. Critics such as Apple Insider have asserted that fragmentation via
hardware and software pushed Android's growth through large volumes of low end,
budget-priced devices running older versions of Android. They maintain this
forces Android developers to write for the "lowest common denominator" to reach
as many users as possible, who have too little incentive to make use of the
latest hardware or software features only available on a smaller percentage of
devices. However, OpenSignal, who develops both Android and iOS apps, concluded
that although fragmentation can make development trickier, Android's wider
global reach also increases the potential reward.

Research company Canalys estimated in the second quarter of 2009, that Android
had a 2.8% share of worldwide smartphone shipments. By the fourth quarter of
2010, this had grown to 33% of the market becoming the top-selling smartphone
platform, overtaking Symbian. By the third quarter of 2011, Gartner estimated
that more than half (52.5%) of the smartphone sales belonged to Android. By the
third quarter of 2012 Android had a 75% share of the global smartphone market
according to the research firm IDC.

In July 2011, Google said that 550,000 Android devices were being activated
every day, up from 400,000 per day in May, and more than 100 million devices had
been activated with 4.4% growth per week. In September 2012, 500 million devices
had been activated with 1.3 million activations per day. In May 2013, at Google
I/O, Sundar Pichai announced that 900 million Android devices had been
activated.

Android market share varies by location. In July 2012, "mobile subscribers aged
13+" in the United States using Android were up to 52%, and rose to 90% in
China. During the third quarter of 2012, Android's worldwide smartphone shipment
market share was 75%, with 750 million devices activated in total. In April 2013
Android had 1.5 million activations per day. As of May 2013[update], 48 billion
applications ("apps") have been installed from the Google Play store, and by
September 2013, one billion Android devices have been activated.

As of February 2017[update], the Google Play store has over 2.7 million Android
applications published, and As of May 2016[update], apps have been downloaded
more than 65 billion times. The operating system's success has made it a target
for patent litigation as part of the so-called "smartphone wars" between
technology companies.

Android devices account for more than half of smartphone sales in most markets,
including the US, while "only in Japan was Apple on top" (September–November
2013 numbers). At the end of 2013, over 1.5 billion Android smartphones have
been sold in the four years since 2010, making Android the most sold phone and
tablet OS. Three billion Android smartphones are estimated to be sold by the end
of 2014 (including previous years). According to Gartner research company,
Android-based devices outsold all contenders, every year since 2012. In 2013, it
outsold Windows 2.8:1 or by 573 million. As of 2015[update], Android has the
largest installed base of all operating systems; Since 2013, devices running it
also sell more than Windows, iOS and Mac OS X devices combined.

According to StatCounter, which tracks only the use for browsing the web,
Android is the most popular mobile operating system since August 2013. Android
is the most popular operating system for web browsing in India and several other
countries (e.g. virtually all of Asia, with Japan and North Korea exceptions).
According to StatCounter, Android is most used on mobile in all African
countries, and it stated "mobile usage has already overtaken desktop in several
countries including India, South Africa and Saudi Arabia", with virtually all
countries in Africa having done so already (except for seven countries,
including Egypt), such as Ethiopia and Kenya in which mobile (including tablets)
usage is at 90.46% (Android only, accounts for 75.81% of all use there).

While Android phones in the Western world commonly include Google's proprietary
add-ons (such as Google Play) to the otherwise open-source operating system,
this is increasingly not the case in emerging markets; "ABI Research claims that
65 million devices shipped globally with open-source Android in the second
quarter of [2014], up from 54 million in the first quarter"; depending on
country, percent of phones estimated to be based only on Android's source code
(AOSP), forgoing the Android trademark: Thailand (44%), Philippines (38%),
Indonesia (31%), India (21%), Malaysia (24%), Mexico (18%), Brazil (9%).

According to a January 2015 Gartner report, "Android surpassed a billion
shipments of devices in 2014, and will continue to grow at a double-digit pace
in 2015, with a 26 percent increase year over year." This made it the first time
that any general-purpose operating system has reached more than one billion end
users within a year: by reaching close to 1.16 billion end users in 2014,
Android shipped over four times more than iOS and OS X combined, and over three
times more than Microsoft Windows. Gartner expected the whole mobile phone
market to "reach two billion units in 2016", including Android. Describing the
statistics, Farhad Manjoo wrote in The New York Times that "About one of every
two computers sold today is running Android. [It] has become Earth’s dominant
computing platform."

According to a Statistica's estimate, Android smartphones had an installed base
of 1.8 billion units in 2015, which was 76% of the estimated total number of
smartphones worldwide.[b] Android has the largest installed base of any mobile
operating system and, since 2013, the highest-selling operating system overall
with sales in 2012, 2013 and 2014 close to the installed base of all PCs. In the
third quarter of 2015, Android's share of the global smartphone shipment market
was 84.7%, the highest ever. As of September 28, 2016, with 52.5% market share,
Samsung remains the leading OEM for shipping Android running smartphones and
tablets, followed by followed by LG, Huawei, Motorola, Lenovo, Sony, HTC, Asus,
Alcatel and Xiaomi.

By August 2016, the two biggest continents have gone mobile-majority, judged by
web use ("desktop" has 46.92%–55.16% use worldwide, depending on day of the
week, making some weeks desktop-minority; lowest full month was at 50.05%);
because of Android (see usage share of operating systems), that has majority use
on smartphones in virtually all countries (all continents have gone
Android-majority, including North America except for Oceania, because of
Australia), with few exceptions (all of which have iOS-majority); in the US,
Android is close to iOS, having exchanged majority position a few times, Canada
and the following are also exceptions: Japan, Philippines, Australia and the
only exceptions in Europe are the UK, Switzerland, Belgium and the Nordic
countries Denmark, Iceland, Sweden and Norway.

By 2016, Android was on the majority of smartphones in virtually all countries
in the world, excluding United States and Canada (while including North America
continent as a whole), Australia and Japan. A few countries, such as the UK,
lose Android-majority if tablets are included.

In September 2015, Google announced that Android had 1.4 billion monthly active
users.

Despite its success on smartphones, initially Android tablet adoption was slow.
One of the main causes was the chicken or the egg situation where consumers were
hesitant to buy an Android tablet due to a lack of high quality tablet
applications, but developers were hesitant to spend time and resources
developing tablet applications until there was a significant market for them.
The content and app "ecosystem" proved more important than hardware specs as the
selling point for tablets. Due to the lack of Android tablet-specific
applications in 2011, early Android tablets had to make do with existing
smartphone applications that were ill-suited to larger screen sizes, whereas the
dominance of Apple's iPad was reinforced by the large number of tablet-specific
iOS applications.

Despite app support in its infancy, a considerable number of Android tablets
(alongside those using other operating systems, such as the HP TouchPad and
BlackBerry PlayBook) were rushed out to market in an attempt to capitalize on
the success of the iPad. InfoWorld has suggested that some Android manufacturers
initially treated their first tablets as a "Frankenphone business", a short-term
low-investment opportunity by placing a smartphone-optimized Android OS (before
Android 3.0 Honeycomb for tablets was available) on a device while neglecting
user interface. This approach, such as with the Dell Streak, failed to gain
market traction with consumers as well as damaging the early reputation of
Android tablets. Furthermore, several Android tablets such as the Motorola Xoom
were priced the same or higher than the iPad, which hurt sales. An exception was
the Amazon Kindle Fire, which relied upon lower pricing as well as access to
Amazon's ecosystem of applications and content.

This began to change in 2012, with the release of the affordable Nexus 7 and a
push by Google for developers to write better tablet applications. According to
International Data Corporation, shipments of Android-powered tablets surpassed
iPads in Q3 2012.

As of the end of 2013, over 191.6 million Android tablets had sold in three
years since 2011. This made Android tablets the most-sold type of tablet in
2013, surpassing iPads in the second quarter of 2013.

According to the StatCounter's June 2015 web use statistics, Android tablets
represent the majority of tablet devices used on the South American (then lost
majority) and African continents (60.23%), while they have equaled with the
iPad's market share in major countries on all continents (with the North America
as an exception, though in El Salvador Android has the majority), and getting
close to representing the majority on the whole Asian continent having done so
already in India (65.9%), Indonesia (62.22%), and most Middle-Eastern countries.
In about half of the European countries, Android tablets have a majority market
share. China is an exception for the major developing countries, in which
Android phablets (classified as smartphones while similar in size to tablets)
are more popular than Android tablets or iPads.

In March 2016, Galen Gruman of InfoWorld stated that Android devices could be a
"real part of your business [..] there's no longer a reason to keep Android at
arm's length. It can now be as integral to your mobile portfolio as Apple's iOS
devices are". A year earlier, Gruman had stated that Microsoft's own mobile
Office apps were "better on iOS and Android" than on Microsoft's own Windows 10
devices.

Charts in this section provide breakdowns of Android versions, based on devices
accessing the Google Play Store in a seven-day period ending on March 6,
2017.[c] Therefore, these statistics exclude devices running various Android
forks that do not access the Google Play Store, such as Amazon's Fire tablets.

In general, paid Android applications can easily be pirated. In a May 2012
interview with Eurogamer, the developers of Football Manager stated that the
ratio of pirated players vs legitimate players was 9:1 for their game Football
Manager Handheld. However, not every developer agreed that piracy rates were an
issue; for example, in July 2012 the developers of the game Wind-up Knight said
that piracy levels of their game were only 12%, and most of the piracy came from
China, where people cannot purchase apps from Google Play.

In 2010, Google released a tool for validating authorized purchases for use
within apps, but developers complained that this was insufficient and trivial to
crack. Google responded that the tool, especially its initial release, was
intended as a sample framework for developers to modify and build upon depending
on their needs, not as a finished piracy solution. Android "Jelly Bean"
introduced the ability for paid applications to be encrypted, so that they may
work only on the device for which they were purchased.

Both Android and Android phone manufacturers have been involved in numerous
patent lawsuits. On August 12, 2010, Oracle sued Google over claimed
infringement of copyrights and patents related to the Java programming language.
Oracle originally sought damages up to $6.1 billion, but this valuation was
rejected by a United States federal judge who asked Oracle to revise the
estimate. In response, Google submitted multiple lines of defense,
counterclaiming that Android did not infringe on Oracle's patents or copyright,
that Oracle's patents were invalid, and several other defenses. They said that
Android's Java runtime environment is based on Apache Harmony, a clean room
implementation of the Java class libraries, and an independently developed
virtual machine called Dalvik. In May 2012, the jury in this case found that
Google did not infringe on Oracle's patents, and the trial judge ruled that the
structure of the Java APIs used by Google was not copyrightable. The parties
agreed to zero dollars in statutory damages for a small amount of copied code.
On May 9, 2014, the Federal Circuit partially reversed the district court
ruling, ruling in Oracle's favor on the copyrightability issue, and remanding
the issue of fair use to the district court.

In December 2015, Google announced that the next major release of Android
(Android Nougat) would switch to OpenJDK, which is the official open-source
implementation of the Java platform, instead of using the now-discontinued
Apache Harmony project as its runtime. Code reflecting this change was also
posted to the AOSP source repository. In its announcement, Google claimed this
was part of an effort to create a "common code base" between Java on Android and
other platforms. Google later admitted in a court filing that this was part of
an effort to address the disputes with Oracle, as its use of OpenJDK code is
governed under the GNU General Public License (GPL) with a linking exception,
and that "any damages claim associated with the new versions expressly licensed
by Oracle under OpenJDK would require a separate analysis of damages from
earlier releases". In June 2016, a United States federal court ruled in favor of
Google, stating that its use of the APIs was fair use.

In addition to lawsuits against Google directly, various proxy wars have been
waged against Android indirectly by targeting manufacturers of Android devices,
with the effect of discouraging manufacturers from adopting the platform by
increasing the costs of bringing an Android device to market. Both Apple and
Microsoft have sued several manufacturers for patent infringement, with Apple's
ongoing legal action against Samsung being a particularly high-profile case. In
October 2011, Microsoft said they had signed patent license agreements with ten
Android device manufacturers, whose products account for "70% in the U.S.".  and
55% of the worldwide revenue for Android devices. These include Samsung and HTC.
Samsung's patent settlement with Microsoft included an agreement to allocate
more resources to developing and marketing phones running Microsoft's Windows
Phone operating system. Microsoft has also tied its own Android software to
patent licenses, requiring the bundling of Microsoft Office Mobile and Skype
applications on Android devices to subsidize the licensing fees, while at the
same time helping to promote its software lines.

Google has publicly expressed its frustration for the current patent landscape
in the United States, accusing Apple, Oracle and Microsoft of trying to take
down Android through patent litigation, rather than innovating and competing
with better products and services. In September 2011, Google purchased Motorola
Mobility for US$12.5 billion, which was viewed in part as a defensive measure to
protect Android, since Motorola Mobility held more than 17,000 patents. In
December 2011, Google bought over a thousand patents from IBM.

In 2013, FairSearch, a lobbying organization supported by Microsoft, Oracle and
others, filed a complaint regarding Android with the European Commission,
alleging that its free-of-charge distribution model constituted anti-competitive
predatory pricing. The Free Software Foundation Europe, whose donors include
Google, disputed the Fairsearch allegations. On April 20, 2016, the EU filed a
formal antitrust complaint against Google based upon the FairSearch allegations,
arguing that its leverage over Android vendors, including the mandatory bundling
of the entire suite of proprietary Google software, hindering the ability for
competing search providers to be integrated into Android, and barring vendors
from producing devices running forks of Android, constituted anti-competitive
practices.

Google has developed several variations of Android for specific use cases,
including Android Wear for wearable devices such as wrist watches, Android TV
for televisions, Android Auto for cars, and Brillo, later renamed Android
Things, for smart devices and Internet of things.

The open and customizable nature of Android allows device makers to use it on
other electronics as well, including laptops and netbooks, smartbooks, cameras,
headphones, home automation systems, game consoles, mirrors, media players, and
landline telephones.

Ouya, a video game console running Android, became one of the most successful
Kickstarter campaigns, crowdfunding US$8.5m for its development, and was later
followed by other Android-based consoles, such as Nvidia's Shield Portable – an
Android device in a video game controller form factor.

In 2011, Google demonstrated "Android@Home", a home automation technology which
uses Android to control a range of household devices including light switches,
power sockets and thermostats. Prototype light bulbs were announced that could
be controlled from an Android phone or tablet, but Android head Andy Rubin was
cautious to note that "turning a lightbulb on and off is nothing new", pointing
to numerous failed home automation services. Google, he said, was thinking more
ambitiously and the intention was to use their position as a cloud services
provider to bring Google products into customers' homes.

Parrot unveiled an Android-based car stereo system known as Asteroid in 2011,
followed by a successor, the touchscreen-based Asteroid Smart, in 2012. In 2013,
Clarion released its own Android-based car stereo, the AX1. In January 2014, at
the Consumer Electronics Show (CES), Google announced the formation of the Open
Automotive Alliance, a group including several major automobile makers (Audi,
General Motors, Hyundai, and Honda) and Nvidia, which aims to produce
Android-based in car entertainment systems for automobiles, "[bringing] the best
of Android into the automobile in a safe and seamless way."

Android comes preinstalled on a few laptops (a similar functionality of running
Android applications is also available in Google's Chrome OS) and can also be
installed on personal computers by end users. On those platforms Android
provides additional functionality for physical keyboards and mice, together with
the "Alt-Tab" key combination for switching applications quickly with a
keyboard. In December 2014, one reviewer commented that Android's notification
system is "vastly more complete and robust than in most environments" and that
Android is "absolutely usable" as one's primary desktop operating system.

In October 2015, The Wall Street Journal reported that Android will serve as
Google's future main laptop operating system, with the plan to fold Chrome OS
into it by 2017. Google's Sundar Pichai, who led the development of Android,
explained that "mobile as a computing paradigm is eventually going to blend with
what we think of as desktop today." and back in 2009, Google co-founder Sergey
Brin himself said that Chrome OS and Android would "likely converge over time."
Lockheimer, who replaced Pichai as head of Android and Chrome OS, responded to
this claim with an official Google blog post stating that "While we've been
working on ways to bring together the best of both operating systems, there's no
plan to phase out Chrome OS [which has] guaranteed auto-updates for five years".
That is unlike Android where support is shorter with "EOL dates [being..] at
least 3 years [into the future] for Android tablets for education".



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Fundamentals_of_Caring

The Fundamentals of Caring is a 2016 American comedy-drama film written and
directed by Rob Burnett, based on the 2012 novel The Revised Fundamentals of
Caregiving by Jonathan Evison and stars Paul Rudd, Craig Roberts and Selena
Gomez. The film had its world premiere at the Sundance Film Festival on January
29, 2016 and was released by Netflix on June 24, 2016.

Ben (Paul Rudd) is a retired writer, who lost his son three years ago when Ben
parked his car on their steep driveway and the car suddenly rolled down
impacting his son, and whose wife is trying to divorce him, but he refuses to
return the signed documents. Needing a new job, he takes a six-week course to
become a caregiver. He gets a job from an English woman named Elsa (Jennifer
Ehle), a registered caregiver and bank manager, whose 18-year-old son Trevor
(Craig Roberts) has paralysiscm. Trevor is a sardonic, anxious boy with a
fascination with American roadside attractions, and Ben suggests one day that
they go to see some of them. Trevor initially refuses, and Elsa worries Ben is
becoming too close to him, as Trevor's father left when he was diagnosed, only
sending him letters throughout the years. Ben soon finds himself hounded by a
court tracker hired by his wife and avoids his visits.

Eventually, Elsa agrees with Ben's road trip plan, and he and Trevor embark on a
journey to the world's deepest pit. On the way there, Trevor says he wants to
see his father, who owns a car dealership in Salt Lake City. Stopping at a gas
station, the two meet a girl Trevor's age named Dot (Selena Gomez), who Trevor
develops a crush on. When they encounter her again at a diner later on, they see
her attempting to hitchhike, and Ben decides to give her a ride. Dot informs
them on the way that she is heading to Denver to restart her life, and that her
mother has died. As the three bond, especially she and Trevor, Ben notices a car
that has been following them, and tells the two of it at a motel. He believes it
is someone sent by his wife.

On October 11, 2012, Worldwide Pants' Rob Burnett and Jon Beckerman acquired the
film rights to Jonathan Evison's novel The Revised Fundamentals of Caregiving.
Burnett would adapt and direct the film. On January 7, 2015, Paul Rudd was added
to the cast to play the male lead, which Donna Gigliotti and James Spies would
produce. On January 13, Selena Gomez also joined the film.

On December 7, it was announced that the original title, The Revised
Fundamentals of Caregiving, had been changed to The Fundamentals of Caring. It
was later revealed Bobby Cannavale and Frederick Weller had been cast in the
film.

Filming began on January 22, 2015, in Atlanta, Georgia. In early February
filming took place in Cartersville, Georgia. Filming concluded on February 26,
2015, after 26 days of filming.

The film had its world premiere at the 2016 Sundance Film Festival as the
Closing Night Film. In January 2016, prior to the film's premiere at the
festival Netflix acquired global distribution rights to the film. It was
released on Netflix on June 24, 2016.

On Rotten Tomatoes the film has a rating of 78%, based on 27 reviews, with an
average rating of 6.2/10. On Metacritic the film has a score of 55 out of 100,
based on 10 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mark_Hunt

Mark Richard Hunt (born 23 March 1974) is a New Zealand mixed martial artist and
former kickboxer of Samoan descent, currently living in Sydney, Australia. Hunt
competes in the Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC) and was the winner of the
2001 K-1 World Grand Prix. As of 11 July 2016, he is #9 in official UFC
heavyweight rankings. He is known as "King of Walk-Offs" by walking away and
stopping attacks before the referee officially ends the match.

Hunt was born in South Auckland, into a large Samoan family, and was a troubled
child eventually leading to two jail terms for violent offending. He had no
intention to be a professional fighter until a late night altercation outside a
nightclub just after getting out of jail for the second time in Auckland changed
the course of his life. The brawl did not last long, and Hunt knocked out
multiple people. Sam Marsters, one of the bouncers at the door was impressed by
the young man's knockout power and invited him to his gym to take up formal
training, and a week later, Hunt won a Muay Thai kickboxing match via knockout.
Hunt received a six-pack of beer as a reward for the fight. Later that year Hunt
moved to Sydney, Australia (residing in Campbelltown), to train with Alex Tui,
and few years later he settled in Liverpool Kickboxing Gym under Maori
instructor Hape Ngaranoa.

In the beginning of his career, Hunt was used by the promoters as a stepping
stone for their up-and-coming fighters, taking up fights at short notice, until
Tarik Solak promoted K-1 Oceania tournament in February 2000. With a record of
(15-4, 3 KO's) Hunt entered his first K-1 tournament as a heavy underdog.

Hunt's mixed martial arts career saw him fight in events in Japan's PRIDE
Fighting Championships. His first MMA fight was a submission loss to Hidehiko
Yoshida, an Olympic gold medalist in judo. In his second fight, he defeated
American wrestler Dan Bobish by TKO. Hunt stepped in as a late replacement for
Sakuraba, and won a split decision against an outweighed PRIDE middleweight
(205 lb) champion Wanderlei Silva. Silva, renowned for his brutal punching and
Muay Thai clinch game, was neutralized by the hard-hitting Samoan and knocked
down several times in the fight. At the PRIDE Shockwave 2005 event, Hunt
surprisingly defeated Mirko "Cro Cop" Filipović via a split decision, after his
earlier loss to him in K-1. At PRIDE 31: Unbreakable, Hunt defeated Japanese
boxer Yosuke Nishijima in the third round with a powerful one-two punch.

Hunt's next fight was in the opening round of PRIDE's 2006 Open-Weight Grand
Prix (PRIDE Total Elimination Absolute) on 5 May 2006. His opponent was Japan's
Tsuyoshi Kohsaka, who he defeated by TKO in the second round. He then faced
American catch-wrestler Josh Barnett at PRIDE Critical Countdown Absolute in the
second round of the tournament. Hunt was immediately taken down by Barnett and
ultimately lost to a kimura submission roughly two and a half minutes into the
first round.

Following that fight, Hunt next lost to PRIDE Heavyweight Champion Fedor
Emelianenko at PRIDE Shockwave 2006. Hunt controlled Emelianenko most of the
fight and even effectively countered an armbar early in the bout. Hunt's
greatest chance of winning came when he was able to put Emelianenko in an
americana. Unfortunately for Hunt, Emelianenko was able to fight through it and
submit Hunt with a kimura.

On 21 July 2008, more than a year after his last MMA fight, Hunt returned to MMA
to face Alistair Overeem at the Dream 5: Lightweight Grand Prix 2008 Final
Round, and was submitted by an armlock in just over a minute into the first
round.

Hunt was set to fight Jerome Le Banner at Dynamite!! 2008 but ended up fighting
late replacement Melvin Manhoef after Le Banner pulled out. Despite the fact
that he had a substantial weight advantage over Manhoef, he was knocked out in
18 seconds in the first round. This marked the first time he had been stopped by
knockout due to punches to the head.

On 26 May 2009, Hunt fought former DREAM Middleweight Champion Gegard Mousasi in
the opening round of the Super Hulk Grand Prix at DREAM 9. He lost by submission
in the first round.

Hunt was transferred to the UFC as part of their acquisition of Pride Fighting
Championships. The UFC offered to pay up Hunt's contract and more - totaling
$450,000 - but Hunt elected to fight instead.

Hunt made his UFC debut on 25 September 2010 at UFC 119 against fellow UFC
newcomer and undefeated prospect Sean McCorkle. Hunt trained with American Top
Team for the fight. Photos that had emerged on the internet had shown that Hunt
had lost a considerable amount of weight in comparison to that of his Pride
days. He was defeated via Submission (straight armbar) at 1:03 of the first
round.

Hunt's next fight in the UFC was against Chris Tuchscherer at UFC 127 on 27 Feb
in Sydney, Australia. Hunt defeated Tuchscherer in the second round via KO,
earning Knockout of the Night.

Hunt followed this performance with a decision win over Ben Rothwell at UFC 135
on 24 September 2011.

Hunt next faced Cheick Kongo on 26 February 2012 at UFC 144. Hunt won the fight
via TKO due to punches, at 2:11 of the first round.

Hunt was expected face Stefan Struve on 26 May 2012 at UFC 146. However, he
pulled out of the bout due to injury ten days prior to the event.

The bout with Struve was rescheduled for 3 March 2013 at UFC on Fuel TV 8. Hunt
defeated Struve via third-round TKO in a performance that earned Hunt Knockout
of the Night honors.

Hunt faced Junior dos Santos on 25 May 2013 at UFC 160, replacing an injured
Alistair Overeem. Hunt lost the fight via knockout in the third round in a bout
that earned both participants Fight of the Night honors. Afterwards, some major
MMA media outlets was considering this to be the best fight in the history of
the UFC heavyweight division.

Hunt faced Antônio Silva in the main event on 7 December 2013 at UFC Fight Night
33. The fight went to a decision, with one judge scoring it 48-47 for Hunt while
the other two had the scores even, 47-47, resulting in a majority draw.
Post-fight, Dana White stated that the bout won Fight of the Night and, despite
the draw result, both men would receive their win bonuses. The bout with Silva
has been described as one of the best in the promotion's heavyweight history.
Subsequently, Silva failed a post-fight test for elevated testosterone (he had
been undergoing UFC-approved testosterone replacement therapy). In turn, the
bout is still a "draw" on Hunt's official record, while in Silva's case it was
overturned to a no-contest.

On 5 August 2014, Hunt posted cryptic tweets about becoming unemployed, which
Dana White immediately denied. At first, Hunt blamed his tweets on hunger, but
later in mid-August he revealed that he had decided to walk away from the sport
due to business reasons. Hunt originally wanted a three-fight contract while the
UFC wanted an eight-fight contract. After Hunt's decision to walk away, his wife
talked him around and he ended up with a six-fight contract with the
organization. At the end of August 2014, Hunt revealed that the contract will be
the last of his mixed martial arts career.

Hunt faced Roy Nelson on 20 September 2014 at UFC Fight Night 52. He won the
fight by knockout in the second round. The win earned Hunt his first Performance
of the Night bonus award, and the World MMA Awards' 2014 Knockout Of The Year
award.

On 21 October 2014, it was announced that Hunt would replace injured UFC
Heavyweight Champion Cain Velasquez in the main event at UFC 180. He faced off
against Fabrício Werdum for the interim UFC Heavyweight Championship. Despite
having early success and dropping Werdum due to punches twice, Hunt lost the
fight via TKO in the second round.

Hunt faced Stipe Miocic on 10 May 2015 at UFC Fight Night 65. He lost the fight
via TKO in the fifth round. Miocic set a UFC record for the most strikes landed
in a fight, outlanding Hunt 361 - 48 over the duration of the bout.

Hunt faced Antônio Silva in a rematch on 15 November 2015 at UFC 193. Hunt won
the fight via TKO, after dropping his opponent with a straight right up against
the fence, at 3:41 of the first round.

Hunt faced Frank Mir on 20 March 2016 at UFC Fight Night 85. He won the fight
via KO in the first round, after putting Mir to the canvas with a right hand,
and finished with a 'walk-off' KO. He was awarded with Performance of the Night
for his efforts. It was later announced that Mir failed an in-competition drug
test.

Despite talks about the contract done after previous dispute being Hunt's last,
on 14 April 2016 it was published that Hunt had signed new six-fight,
multi-million contract with UFC.

Hunt faced a returning Brock Lesnar on 9 July 2016 at UFC 200, but lost by
unanimous decision. However, on 15 July it was revealed that Lesnar had tested
positive on a banned substance in a pre-fight drug test. The test result was
conducted on 28 June 11 days prior to the fight, and was flagged by USADA as a
potential anti-doping violation. On 19 July, the UFC announced that Lesnar
tested positive for the same banned substance on a second, in-competition
sample. On 23 August, the Nevada Athletic Commission confirmed that Lesnar twice
tested positive for the estrogen blocker clomiphene, and that he has been
temporarily suspended. As a result of Lesnars positive tests, the result of the
fight was later changed to a no contest.

Hunt faced Alistair Overeem in a rematch on 4 March 2017 at UFC 209. He lost the
fight via knockout due to knees in the third round.

Hunt is the subject of a feature-length documentary The Art of Fighting (2013),
which premiered on Fuel TV (Australia) on 22 May 2013. Hunt was cast in a small
role in the Australian film Crazy Murder, released in 2014.

Hunt was born a Mormon, but is now a born-again Christian. He lives in Australia
with his second wife and has six children. The first two children from his first
marriage are already adults. Hunt and his second wife, Julie, met in a reggae
club around 1994 and have four children. In December 2014 Hunt's older brother
John committed suicide at the age of 44.

In August 2015, Hunt became a vegan after viewing undercover video footage of
the insides of a factory farm. On his Facebook page, where he posted the video,
he captioned, "I'm going vegan, hate this". However, on 7 July 2016, Hunt has
not gone completely vegan due to the time demands of the sport, but is a
vegetarian.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pablo_Escobar

Pablo Emilio Escobar Gaviria (Spanish pronunciation: [ˈpaβɺo eˈmiɺio eskoˈβar
ɣaˈβiɾiä]; December 1, 1949 – December 2, 1993) was a Colombian drug lord, drug
trafficker, and narco-terrorist. His cartel supplied an estimated 80% of the
cocaine smuggled into the United States at the height of his career, turning
over US $21.9 billion a year in personal income. He was often called "The King
of Cocaine" and was the wealthiest criminal in history, with an estimated known
net worth of US $30 billion by the early 1990s (equivalent to about $55 billion
as of 2016), making him one of the richest men in the world at his prime.

Escobar was born in Rionegro, Colombia and grew up in nearby Medellín. He
studied briefly at Universidad Autónoma Latinoamericana of Medellin but left
without a degree; he began to engage in criminal activity that involved selling
contraband cigarettes and fake lottery tickets, and he participated in motor
vehicle theft. In the 1970s, he began to work for various contraband smugglers,
often kidnapping and holding people for ransom before beginning to distribute
powder cocaine himself, as well as establishing the first smuggling routes into
the United States in 1975. His infiltration to the drug market of the U.S.
expanded exponentially due to the rising demand for cocaine and, by the 1980s,
it was estimated that 70 to 80 tons of cocaine were being shipped from Colombia
to the U.S. on a monthly basis. His drug network was commonly known as the
Medellín Cartel, which often competed with rival cartels domestically and
abroad, resulting in massacres and the murders of police officers, judges,
locals, and prominent politicians.

In 1982, Escobar was elected as an alternate member of the Chamber of
Representatives of Colombia as part of the Colombian Liberal Party. Through
this, he was responsible for the construction of many hospitals, schools, and
churches in western Colombia, which gained him popularity inside the local Roman
Catholic Church as well as with the locals of the towns that he frequented.
However, Colombia became the murder capital of the world, and Escobar was
vilified by the Colombian and American governments. In 1993, Escobar was shot
and killed in his hometown by Colombian National Police, one day after his 44th
birthday.

Pablo Emilio Escobar Gaviria was born on December 1, 1949, in Rionegro, in the
Antioquia Department of Colombia. He was the third of seven children to Abel de
Jesús Dari Escobar, a farmer, and Hermilda Gaviria, an elementary school
teacher. Raised in the nearby city of Medellín, Escobar is thought to have begun
his criminal career as a teenager, allegedly stealing gravestones and sanding
them down for resale to local smugglers. His brother, Roberto Escobar, denies
this, instead claiming that the gravestones came from cemetery owners whose
clients had stopped paying for site care, and that he had a relative who had a
monuments business. Escobar's son, Sebastián Marroquín, claims his father's
foray into crime began with a successful practice of selling counterfeit high
school diplomas, generally counterfeiting those awarded by the Universidad
Autónoma Latinoamericana of Medellín. Escobar studied at the University for a
short period, but left without obtaining a degree.

Escobar eventually became involved in many criminal activities with Oscar Benel
Aguirre, with the duo running petty street scams, selling contraband cigarettes,
fake lottery tickets, and stealing cars.[citation needed] In the early 1970s,
prior to entering the drug trade, Escobar acted as a thief and bodyguard,
allegedly earning US $100,000 by kidnapping and holding a Medellín executive for
ransom. Escobar began working for Alvaro Prieto, a contraband smuggler who
operated around Medellín, aiming to fulfill a childhood ambition to have COL $1
million by the time he was 22. Escobar is noted for his bank deposit of COL $100
million (more than US $3 million), when he turned 26.

In The Accountant's Story, Roberto Escobar discusses the means by which Pablo
rose from middle-class simplicity and obscurity to one of the world's wealthiest
men. Beginning in 1975, Pablo started developing his cocaine operation, flying
out planes several times, mainly between Colombia and Panama, along smuggling
routes into the United States. When he later bought fifteen bigger airplanes,
including a Learjet and six helicopters, according to his son, a dear friend of
Pablo's died during the landing of an airplane, and the plane was destroyed.
Pablo reconstructed the airplane from the scrap parts that were left and later
hung it above the gate to his ranch at Hacienda Nápoles.

In May 1976, Escobar and several of his men were arrested and found in
possession of 39 pounds (18 kg) of white paste, attempting to return to Medellín
with a heavy load from Ecuador. Initially, Pablo tried to bribe the Medellín
judges who were forming a case against him, and was unsuccessful. After many
months of legal wrangling, he ordered the murder of the two arresting officers,
and the case was later dropped. Roberto Escobar details this as the point where
Pablo began his pattern of dealing with the authorities, by either bribery or
murder.

Roberto Escobar maintains Pablo fell into the drug business simply because other
types of contraband became too dangerous to traffic. As there were no drug
cartels then, and only a few drug barons, Pablo saw it as untapped territory he
wished to make his own. In Peru, Pablo would buy the cocaine paste, which would
then be refined in a laboratory in a two-story house in Medellín. On his first
trip, Pablo bought a paltry 30 pounds (14 kg) of paste in what was noted as the
first step towards building his empire. At first, he smuggled the cocaine in old
plane tires, and a pilot could return as much as US $500,000 per flight,
dependent on the quantity smuggled.

Soon, the demand for cocaine was skyrocketing in the United States, and Escobar
organized more smuggling shipments, routes, and distribution networks in South
Florida, California, and other parts of the country. He and cartel co-founder
Carlos Lehder worked together to develop a new trans-shipment point in the
Bahamas, an island called Norman's Cay about 220 miles (350 km) southeast of the
Florida coast. According to his brother, Escobar did not purchase Norman's Cay;
it was, instead, a sole venture of Lehder's. Escobar and Robert Vesco purchased
most of the land on the island, which included a 1 kilometre (3,300 ft)
airstrip, a harbor, a hotel, houses, boats, and aircraft, and they built a
refrigerated warehouse to store the cocaine. From 1978 to 1982, this was used as
a central smuggling route for the Medellín Cartel. With the enormous profits
generated by this route, Escobar was soon able to purchase 7.7 square miles
(20 km2) of land in Antioquia for several million dollars, on which he built the
Hacienda Nápoles. The luxury house he created contained a zoo, a lake, a
sculpture garden, a private bullring, and other diversions for his family and
the cartel.

At one point it was estimated[by whom?] that 70 to 80 tons of cocaine were being
shipped from Colombia to the United States every month. In the mid-1980s, at the
height of its power, the Medellín Cartel was shipping as much as 11 tons per
flight in jetliners to the United States (the biggest load shipped by Escobar
was 51,000 pounds (23,000 kg) mixed with fish paste and shipped via boat, as
confirmed by his brother in the book Escobar). Roberto Escobar also claimed
that, in addition to using planes, his brother employed two small submarines to
transport the massive loads.

In 1982 Escobar was elected as an alternate member of the Chamber of
Representatives of Colombia, as part of the Colombian Liberal Party. This made
Escobar the official representative of the Colombian government for the
swearing-in of Felipe González in Spain.[citation needed]

Escobar quickly became known internationally as his drug network gained
notoriety; the Medellín Cartel controlled a large portion of the drugs that
entered the United States, Mexico, Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic,
Venezuela, and Spain. The production process was also altered, with coca from
Bolivia and Peru replacing the coca from Colombia, which was beginning to be
seen as substandard quality than the coca from the neighboring countries. As
demand for more and better cocaine increased, Escobar began working with Roberto
Suárez Goméz, helping to further the product to other countries in the Americas
and Europe, as well as being rumored to reach as far as Asia.

Corruption and intimidation characterized Escobar's dealings with the Colombian
system. He worked to implement an effective, inescapable policy for dealing with
law enforcement and the government, referred to as "plata o plomo" (literally
"silver or lead", colloquially "[accept] money or [face] bullets"). Its
execution resulted in the deaths of hundreds of individuals, including
civilians, policemen, and state officials. At the same time, Escobar bribed
countless government officials, judges, and other politicians. He was allegedly
responsible for the 1989 murder of Colombian presidential candidate Luis Carlos
Galán, the heavy favorite in the 1990 Colombian presidential election, as well
as for the bombing of Avianca Flight 203 and the 1989 DAS Building bombing in
Bogotá. The Medellín Cartel would also be involved in a deadly drug war with its
primary rival, the Cali Cartel, for most of its existence.[citation needed]

It is alleged that Escobar backed the 1985 storming of the Colombian Supreme
Court by left-wing guerrillas from the 19th of April Movement, also known as
M-19. The siege, which was done in retaliation for the Supreme Court studying
the constitutionality of Colombia's extradition treaty with the U.S., resulted
in the murders of half the judges on the court M-19 were paid to break into the
Palace and burn all papers and files on Los Extraditables — a group of cocaine
smugglers who were under threat of being extradited to the U.S. by the Colombian
government. Escobar was listed as a part of Los Extraditables. Hostages were
also taken for negotiation of their release, thus helping to prevent extradition
of Los Extraditables to the U.S. for their crimes.

During the height of its operations, the Medellín Cartel brought in more than US
$70 million per day (roughly $22 billion in a year). Smuggling 15 tons of
cocaine per day, worth more than half a billion dollars, into the United States,
the cartel spent over US $1000 per week purchasing rubber bands to wrap the
stacks of cash, storing most of it in their warehouses. Ten percent (10%) of the
cash had to be written off per year because of "spoilage", due to rats creeping
in and nibbling on the bills they could reach.

When questioned about the essence of the cocaine business, Escobar replied with
"[the business is] simple: you bribe someone here, you bribe someone there, and
you pay a friendly banker to help you bring the money back." In 1989, Forbes
magazine estimated Escobar to be one of 227 billionaires in the world with a
personal net worth of close to US $3 billion while his Medellín Cartel
controlled 80% of the global cocaine market. It is commonly believed that
Escobar was the principal financier behind Medellín's Atlético Nacional, which
won South America's most prestigious football tournament, the Copa Libertadores,
in 1989.

While seen as an enemy of the United States and Colombian governments, Escobar
was a hero to many in Medellín (especially the poor people). He was a natural at
public relations, and he worked to create goodwill among the poor of Colombia. A
lifelong sports fan, he was credited with building football fields and
multi-sports courts, as well as sponsoring children's football teams. Escobar
was also responsible for the construction of many hospitals, schools, and
churches in western Colombia, which gained him popularity inside the local Roman
Catholic Church.[page needed] He worked hard to cultivate his Robin Hood image,
and frequently distributed money through housing projects and other civic
activities, which gained him notable popularity among the poor. The population
of Medellín often helped Escobar avoid police capture by serving as lookouts,
hiding information from authorities, or doing whatever else they could to
protect him. At the height of his power, drug traffickers from Medellín and
other areas were handing over between 20% and 35% of their Colombian
cocaine-related profits to Escobar, as he was the one who shipped cocaine
successfully to the United States.[citation needed]

The Colombian cartels' continuing struggles to maintain supremacy resulted in
Colombia quickly becoming the world's murder capital with 25,100 violent deaths
in 1991 and 27,100 in 1992. This increased murder rate was fueled by Escobar's
giving money to his hitmen as a reward for killing police officers, over 600 of
whom died as a result.

After the assassination of Luis Carlos Galán, the administration of César
Gaviria moved against Escobar and the drug cartels. Eventually, the government
negotiated with Escobar and convinced him to surrender and cease all criminal
activity in exchange for a reduced sentence and preferential treatment during
his captivity. Declaring an end to a series of previous violent acts meant to
pressure authorities and public opinion, Escobar surrendered to Colombian
authorities in 1991. Before he gave himself up, the extradition of Colombian
citizens to the United States had been prohibited by the newly approved
Colombian Constitution of 1991. This act was controversial, as it was suspected
that Escobar and other drug lords had influenced members of the Constituent
Assembly in passing the law. Escobar was confined in what became his own
luxurious private prison, La Catedral, which featured a football pitch, giant
doll house, bar, jacuzzi and waterfall. Accounts of Escobar's continued criminal
activities while in prison began to surface in the media, which prompted the
government to attempt to move him to a more conventional jail on July 22, 1992.
Escobar's influence allowed him to discover the plan in advance and make a
well-timed escape, spending the rest of his life evading the police.

Following Escobar's escape, the United States Joint Special Operations Command
(consisting of members of DEVGRU, Delta Force and Centra Spike) joined the
manhunt for Escobar. They trained and advised a special Colombian police task
force known as the Search Bloc, which had been created to locate Escobar. Later,
as the conflict between Escobar and the governments of the United States and
Colombia dragged on, and as the numbers of Escobar's enemies grew, a vigilante
group known as Los Pepes (Los Perseguidos por Pablo Escobar, "People Persecuted
by Pablo Escobar") was formed. The group was financed by his rivals and former
associates, including the Cali Cartel and right-wing paramilitaries led by
Carlos Castaño, who would later fund the Peasant Self-Defense Forces of Córdoba
and Urabá. Los Pepes carried out a bloody campaign, fueled by vengeance, in
which more than 300 of Escobar's associates, his lawyer and relatives were
slain, and a large amount of the Medellín cartel's property was destroyed.

Members of the Search Bloc, and Colombian and United States intelligence
agencies, in their efforts to find Escobar, either colluded with Los Pepes or
moonlighted as both Search Bloc and Los Pepes simultaneously. This coordination
was allegedly conducted mainly through the sharing of intelligence in order to
allow Los Pepes to bring down Escobar and his few remaining allies, but there
are reports that some individual Search Bloc members directly participated in
missions of Los Pepes death squads.[page needed] One of the leaders of Los Pepes
was Diego Murillo Bejarano (also known as "Don Berna"), a former Medellín Cartel
associate who became a rival drug kingpin and eventually emerged as a leader of
one of the most powerful factions within the Self-Defence of Colombia.

16 months after his escape from La Catedral, Pablo Escobar died in a shootout on
December 2, 1993, amid another of Escobar's attempts to elude the Search Bloc. A
Colombian electronic surveillance team, led by Brigadier Hugo Martínez, used
radio triangulation technology to track his radiotelephone transmissions and
found him hiding in Los Olivos, a middle-class barrio in Medellín. With
authorities closing in, a firefight with Escobar and his bodyguard, Alvaro de
Jesús Agudelo (a.k.a. "El Limón"), ensued. The two fugitives attempted to escape
by running across the roofs of adjoining houses to reach a back street, but both
were shot and killed by Colombian National Police. Escobar suffered gunshots to
the leg and torso, and a fatal gunshot through the ear.

It has never been proven who actually fired the final shot into his ear, or
determined whether this shot was made during the gunfight or as part of a
possible execution, with wide speculation remaining regarding the subject. Some
of Escobar's relatives believe that he had committed suicide. His two brothers,
Roberto Escobar and Fernando Sánchez Arellano, believe that he shot himself
through the ear. In a statement regarding the topic, the duo would state that
Pablo "had committed suicide, he did not get killed. During all the years they
went after him, he would say to me every day that if he was really cornered
without a way out, he would 'shoot himself through the ear'."[page needed]

In March 1976, a 27 year old Escobar married Maria Victoria Henao, who was 15.
Despite Maria's older brother Mario's having previously worked with Escobar in
small-scale criminal enterprises, the relationship was discouraged by the Henao
family, who considered Escobar socially inferior. This prompted the pair to
elope, and they soon had two children: Juan Pablo (now Sebastián Marroquín) and
Manuela.

Journalist Virginia Vallejo published the memoir Amando a Pablo, odiando a
Escobar (Loving Pablo, Hating Escobar) in 2007, in which she describes having a
romantic relationship with Escobar. Drug distributor Griselda Blanco is also
reported to have conducted a clandestine, but passionate, relationship with
Escobar, with several items in her later-found diary linking him with the
nicknames "Coque de Mi Rey" (My Coke King) and "Polla Blanca" (White Dick).

After becoming wealthy, Escobar created or bought numerous residences and safe
houses, with the Hacienda Nápoles gaining significant notoriety. The luxury
house contained a colonial house, a sculpture park, and a complete zoo with
animals from various continents, including elephants, exotic birds, giraffes,
and hippopotamuses. Escobar had also planned to construct a Greek-style citadel
near it, and though construction of the citadel was started, it was never
finished.

Escobar also owned a home in the US under his own name: a 6500 square foot,
pink, waterfront mansion situated at 5860 North Bay Road in Miami Beach,
Florida. The four-bedroom estate, built in 1948 on Biscayne Bay, was seized by
the government in the 1980s. Later, the dilapidated property was owned by
Christian de Berdouare, proprietor of the Chicken Kitchen fast-food chain, who
had bought it in 2014. De Berdouare would later hire a documentary film crew and
professional treasure hunters to search the edifice before and after demolition,
for anything related to Escobar or his cartel. They would find unusual holes in
floors and walls, as well as a safe that was stolen from its hole in the marble
flooring before it could be properly examined.

Escobar also owned a massive Caribbean getaway on Isla Grande, the largest of
the cluster of the 27 coral cluster islands comprising Islas del Rosario,
located approximately 22 miles from Cartagena. The compound, now half-demolished
and overtaken by vegetation and wild animals, featured a mansion, apartments,
courtyards, a large swimming pool, a helicopter landing pad, reinforced windows,
tiled floors, and a large, unfinished building to the side of the mansion.

Soon after Escobar's death and the subsequent fragmentation of the Medellín
Cartel, the cocaine market became dominated by the rival Cali Cartel until the
mid-1990s when its leaders were either killed or captured by the Colombian
government. The Robin Hood image that Escobar had cultivated maintained a
lasting influence in Medellín. Many there, especially many of the city's poor
whom Escobar had aided while he was alive, mourned his death, and over 25,000
people attended his funeral.

On July 4, 2006, Virginia Vallejo, a television anchorwoman who was romantically
involved with Escobar from 1983 to 1987, offered Colombian Attorney General
Mario Germán Iguarán Arana her testimony in the trial against former Senator
Alberto Santofimio, who was accused of conspiracy in the 1989 assassination of
presidential candidate Luis Carlos Galán. Iguarán acknowledged that, although
Vallejo contacted his office on July 4, the judge had decided to close the trial
on July 9, several weeks before the prospective closing date. This action was
seen as too late, and Santofimio was sentenced to 24 years in prison for his
role in the assassination.

On July 16, Vallejo was taken to the United States by the Drug Enforcement
Administration. She was transported on a controlled flight for "safety and
security reasons", due to Vallejo's cooperation in sensitive high-profile
criminal cases. On July 24, a video in which Vallejo accused Santofimio of
instigating Escobar to eliminate presidential candidate Galán was aired on
Colombian television. This video was key in helping Santofimio gain exoneration,
as well as a lack of evidence being present in the original trial.

Among Escobar's biographers, only Vallejo has given a detailed explanation of
his role in the 1985 Palace of Justice siege. The journalist stated that Escobar
financed the operation, which was committed by M-19. She would go on to blame
the army for the killings of the Supreme Court judges and the M-19 members
detained after the coup. These statements prompted a reopening of the case in
2008, and when Vallejo was asked to testify in the reopened Palace case, most of
the events she had described in her book and testimonial were confirmed by
Colombia's Commission of Truth. These events led to further investigation into
the siege, which led to a high-ranking former colonel and a former general being
sentenced to 30 and 35 years in prison, respectively, for the forced
disappearance of the detained after the siege. Vallejo would subsequently
testify in the case of Luis Carlos Galán's assassination, which had also been
reopened. She would accuse several politicians, including Colombian presidents
Alfonso López Michelsen, Ernesto Samper and Álvaro Uribe of having links to drug
cartels. Her cooperation in the cases saw Vallejo being granted political asylum
in the United States on June 3, 2010.

Escobar's widow (María Henao, now María Isabel Santos Caballero), son (Juan
Pablo, now Juan Sebastián Marroquín Santos) and daughter (Manuela) fled Colombia
in 1995 after failing to find a country that would grant them asylum. Despite
Escobar's numerous and continual infidelities, Maria remained supportive of her
husband, though she urged him to eschew violence. Members of the Cali Cartel
even replayed their recordings of her conversations with Pablo for their wives
to demonstrate how a woman should behave. This attitude proved to be the reason
the cartel did not kill her and her children after Pablo's death, although the
group demanded (and received) millions of dollars in reparations for Escobar's
war against them. Henao even successfully negotiated for her son's life by
personally guaranteeing he would not seek revenge against the cartel or
participate in the drug trade.

After escaping first to Mozambique, then to Brazil, the family were allowed to
settle in Argentina. Living under her assumed name, Henao became a successful
real estate entrepreneur until one of her business associates discovered her
true identity, and Henao absconded with her earnings. Local media were alerted,
and after being exposed as Escobar's widow, Henao was imprisoned for eighteen
months while her finances were investigated. Ultimately, authorities were unable
to link her funds to illegal activity, and she was released. According to her
son, Henao fell in love with Escobar "because of his naughty smile [and] the way
he looked at [her]. [He] was affectionate and sweet. A great lover. I fell in
love with his desire to help people and his compassion for their hardship. We
[would] drive to places where he dreamed of building schools for the poor. From
[the] beginning, he was always a gentleman."

Henao is now believed to be living under an alias in North Carolina. Argentinian
filmmaker Nicolas Entel's documentary Sins of My Father (2009) chronicles
Marroquín's efforts to seek forgiveness, on behalf of his father, from the sons
of Rodrigo Lara, Colombia's justice minister who was assassinated in 1984, as
well as from the sons of Luis Carlos Galán, the presidential candidate who was
assassinated in 1989. The film was shown at the 2010 Sundance Film Festival and
premiered in the US on HBO in October 2010. In 2014, Marroquín published Pablo
Escobar, My Father under his birth name. The book provides a firsthand insight
into details of his father's life and describes the fundamentally disintegrating
effect of his death upon the family. Marroquín aimed to publish the book in
hopes to resolve any inaccuracies regarding his father's excursions during the
1990s.

Escobar's sister, Luz Maria Escobar, also made multiple gestures in attempts to
make amends for the drug baron's crimes. These include making public statements
in the press, leaving letters on the graves of his victims and on the 20th
anniversary of his death, organizing a public memorial for Escobar's victims.
Escobar's body was exhumed on October 28, 2006, at the request of some of his
relatives in order to take a DNA sample to confirm the alleged paternity of an
illegitimate child and remove all doubt about the identity of the body that had
been buried next to his parents for 12 years. A video of the exhumation was
broadcast by RCN, angering Marroquín, who accused his uncle, Roberto Escobar,
and cousin, Nicolas Escobar, of being "merchants of death" by allowing for the
video to air.

After Escobar's death, the ranch, zoo and citadel at Hacienda Nápoles were given
by the government to low income families under a law called Extinción de Dominio
(Domain Extinction). The property has been converted into a theme park
surrounded by four luxury hotels overlooking the zoo.

In 2014 Roberto Escobar founded Escobar Inc with Olof K. Gustafsson and
registered Successor-In-Interest rights for his brother Pablo Escobar in
California, United States.

Two major feature films on Escobar, Escobar (2009) and Killing Pablo (2011),
were announced in 2007. Details about them, and additional films about Escobar,
are listed below.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mexico

Mexico (Spanish: México, pronounced: [ˈme.xi.ko] ( listen), modern Nahuatl ),
officially the United Mexican States (Spanish: Estados Unidos Mexicanos,
 listen (help·info)), is a federal republic in the southern half of North
America. It is bordered to the north by the United States; to the south and west
by the Pacific Ocean; to the southeast by Guatemala, Belize, and the Caribbean
Sea; and to the east by the Gulf of Mexico. Covering almost two million square
kilometers (over 760,000 sq mi), Mexico is the sixth largest country in the
Americas by total area and the 13th largest independent nation in the world.
With an estimated population of over 120 million, it is the eleventh most
populous country and the most populous Spanish-speaking country in the world
while being the second most populous country in Latin America. Mexico is a
federation comprising 31 states and a federal district that is also its capital
and most populous city. Other metropolises include Guadalajara, Monterrey,
Puebla, Toluca, Tijuana and León.

Pre-Columbian Mexico was home to many advanced Mesoamerican civilizations, such
as the Olmec, Toltec, Teotihuacan, Zapotec, Maya and Aztec before first contact
with Europeans. In 1521, the Spanish Empire conquered and colonized the
territory from its base in Mexico-Tenochtitlan, which was administered as the
viceroyalty of New Spain. Three centuries later, this territory became Mexico
following recognition in 1821 after the colony's Mexican War of Independence.
The tumultuous post-independence period was characterized by economic
instability and many political changes. The Mexican–American War (1846–48) led
to the territorial cession of the extensive northern borderlands, one-third of
its territory, to the United States. The Pastry War, the Franco-Mexican War, a
civil war, two empires and a domestic dictatorship occurred through the 19th
century. The dictatorship was overthrown in the Mexican Revolution of 1910,
which culminated with the promulgation of the 1917 Constitution and the
emergence of the country's current political system.

Mexico has the fifteenth largest nominal GDP and the eleventh largest by
purchasing power parity. The Mexican economy is strongly linked to those of its
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) partners, especially the United
States. Mexico was the first Latin American member of the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), joining in 1994. It is classified
as an upper-middle income country by the World Bank and a newly industrialized
country by several analysts. By 2050, Mexico could become the world's fifth or
seventh largest economy. The country is considered both a regional power and
middle power, and is often identified as an emerging global power. Due to its
rich culture and history, Mexico ranks first in the Americas and seventh in the
world by number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Mexico is a megadiverse country,
ranking fourth in the world by biodiversity. In 2015 it was the 9th most visited
country in the world, with 32.1 million international arrivals. Mexico is a
member of the United Nations, the World Trade Organization, the G8+5, the G20,
the Uniting for Consensus and the Pacific Alliance.

Mēxihco is the Nahuatl term for the heartland of the Aztec Empire, namely, the
Valley of Mexico, and its people, the Mexica, and surrounding territories. This
became the future State of Mexico as a division of New Spain prior to
independence (compare Latium). It is generally considered to be a toponym for
the valley which became the primary ethnonym for the Aztec Triple Alliance as a
result, or vice versa. After New Spain won independence from Spain,
representatives decided to name the new country after its capital, Mexico City.
This was founded in 1524 on top of the ancient Mexica capital of
Mexico-Tenochtitlan.

Traditionally, the name Tenochtitlan was thought to come from Nahuatl tetl
[ˈtetɬ] ("rock") and nōchtli [ˈnoːtʃtɬi] ("prickly pear") and is often thought
to mean "Among the prickly pears [growing among] rocks". However, one
attestation in the late 16th-century manuscript known as "the Bancroft
dialogues" suggests the second vowel was short, so that the true etymology
remains uncertain.

The suffix -co is the Nahuatl locative, making the word a place name. Beyond
that, the etymology is uncertain. It has been suggested that it is derived from
Mextli or Mēxihtli, a secret name for the god of war and patron of the Mexica,
Huitzilopochtli, in which case Mēxihco means "Place where Huitzilopochtli
lives". Another hypothesis suggests that Mēxihco derives from a portmanteau of
the Nahuatl words for "Moon" (Mētztli) and navel (xīctli). This meaning ("Place
at the Center of the Moon") might refer to Tenochtitlan's position in the middle
of Lake Texcoco. The system of interconnected lakes, of which Texcoco formed the
center, had the form of a rabbit, which the Mesoamericans pareidolically
associated with the Moon. Still another hypothesis suggests that the word is
derived from Mēctli, the goddess of maguey.

The name of the city-state was transliterated to Spanish as México with the
phonetic value of the letter 'x' in Medieval Spanish, which represented the
voiceless postalveolar fricative [ʃ]. This sound, as well as the voiced
postalveolar fricative [ʒ], represented by a 'j', evolved into a voiceless velar
fricative [x] during the 16th century. This led to the use of the variant Méjico
in many publications in Spanish, most notably in Spain, whereas in Mexico and
most other Spanish–speaking countries México was the preferred spelling. In
recent years the Real Academia Española, which regulates the Spanish language,
determined that both variants are acceptable in Spanish but that the normative
recommended spelling is México. The majority of publications in all
Spanish-speaking countries now adhere to the new norm, even though the
alternative variant is still occasionally used.[citation needed] In English, the
'x' in Mexico represents neither the original nor the current sound, but the
consonant cluster [ks].

The official name of the country has changed as the form of government has
changed. The deceleration of independence signed on 6 November 1813 by the
deputies of the Congress of Anáhuac called the territory América Septentrional
(Northern America). On two occasions (1821–1823 and 1863–1867), the country was
known as Imperio Mexicano (Mexican Empire). All three federal constitutions
(1824, 1857 and 1917, the current constitution) used the name Estados Unidos
Mexicanos—or the variant Estados-Unidos Mexicanos, all of which have been
translated as "United Mexican States". The phrase República Mexicana, "Mexican
Republic", was used in the 1836 Constitutional Laws.

The earliest human artifacts in Mexico are chips of stone tools found near
campfire remains in the Valley of Mexico and radiocarbon-dated to circa 10,000
years ago. Mexico is the site of the domestication of maize, tomato and beans,
which produced an agricultural surplus. This enabled the transition from
paleo-Indian hunter-gatherers to sedentary agricultural villages beginning
around 5000 BCE.

In the subsequent formative eras, maize cultivation and cultural traits such as
a mythological and religious complex, and a vigesimal numeric system, were
diffused from the Mexican cultures to the rest of the Mesoamerican culture area.
In this period, villages became more dense in terms of population, becoming
socially stratified with an artisan class, and developing into chiefdoms. The
most powerful rulers had religious and political power, organizing construction
of large ceremonial centers developed.

The earliest complex civilization in Mexico was the Olmec culture, which
flourished on the Gulf Coast from around 1500 BCE. Olmec cultural traits
diffused through Mexico into other formative-era cultures in Chiapas, Oaxaca and
the Valley of Mexico. The formative period saw the spread of distinct religious
and symbolic traditions, as well as artistic and architectural complexes. The
formative-era of Mesoamerica is considered one of the six independent cradles of
civilization.

In the subsequent pre-classical period, the Maya and Zapotec civilizations
developed complex centers at Calakmul and Monte Albán, respectively. During this
period the first true Mesoamerican writing systems were developed in the
Epi-Olmec and the Zapotec cultures. The Mesoamerican writing tradition reached
its height in the Classic Maya Hieroglyphic script.

In Central Mexico, the height of the classic period saw the ascendancy of
Teotihuacan, which formed a military and commercial empire whose political
influence stretched south into the Maya area as well as north. Teotihuacan, with
a population of more than 150,000 people, had some of the largest pyramidal
structures in the pre-Columbian Americas. After the collapse of Teotihuacán
around 600 CE, competition ensued between several important political centers in
central Mexico such as Xochicalco and Cholula. At this time, during the
Epi-Classic, Nahua peoples began moving south into Mesoamerica from the North,
and became politically and culturally dominant in central Mexico, as they
displaced speakers of Oto-Manguean languages.

During the early post-classic, Central Mexico was dominated by the Toltec
culture, Oaxaca by the Mixtec, and the lowland Maya area had important centers
at Chichén Itzá and Mayapán. Toward the end of the post-Classic period, the
Mexica established dominance.[clarification needed]

Alexander von Humboldt originated the modern usage of "Aztec" as a collective
term applied to all the people linked by trade, custom, religion, and language
to the Mexica state and Ēxcān Tlahtōlōyān, the Triple Alliance. In 1843, with
the publication of the work of William H. Prescott, it was adopted by most of
the world, including 19th-century Mexican scholars who considered it a way to
distinguish present-day Mexicans from pre-conquest Mexicans. This usage has been
the subject of debate since the late 20th century.

The Aztec empire was an informal or hegemonic empire because it did not exert
supreme authority over the conquered lands; it was satisfied with the payment of
tributes from them. It was a discontinuous empire because not all dominated
territories were connected; for example, the southern peripheral zones of
Xoconochco were not in direct contact with the center. The hegemonic nature of
the Aztec empire was demonstrated by their restoration of local rulers to their
former position after their city-state was conquered. The Aztec did not
interfere in local affairs, as long as the tributes were paid.

The Aztec of Central Mexico built a tributary empire covering most of central
Mexico. The Aztec were noted for practicing human sacrifice on a large scale.
Along with this practice, they avoided killing enemies on the battlefield. Their
warring casualty rate was far lower than that of their Spanish counterparts,
whose principal objective was immediate slaughter during battle. This distinct
Mesoamerican cultural tradition of human sacrifice ended with the Spanish
conquest in the 16th century. Over the next centuries Mexican indigenous
cultures were gradually subjected to Spanish colonial rule.

The Spanish first learned of Mexico during the Juan de Grijalva expedition of
1518. The natives kept "repeating: Colua, Colua, and Mexico, Mexico, but we
[explorers] did not know what Colua or Mexico meant", until encountering
Montezuma's governor at the mouth of the Rio de las Banderas.:33–36 The Spanish
conquest of the Aztec Empire began in February 1519 when Hernán Cortés arrived
at the port in Veracruz with ca. 500 conquistadores. After taking control of
that city, he moved on to the Aztec capital. In his search for gold and other
riches, Cortés decided to invade and conquer the Aztec empire.

When the Spaniards arrived, the ruler of the Aztec empire was Moctezuma II, who
was later killed. His successor and brother Cuitláhuac took control of the Aztec
empire, but was among the first to fall from the first smallpox epidemic in the
area a short time later. Unintentionally introduced by Spanish conquerors, among
whom smallpox was endemic, the infectious disease ravaged Mesoamerica in the
1520s. It killed more than 3 million natives as they had no immunity. Other
sources, however, mentioned that the death toll of the Aztecs might have reached
15 million (out of a population of less than 30 million) although such a high
number conflicts with the 350,000 Aztecs who ruled an empire of 5 million or 10
million. Severely weakened, the Aztec empire was easily defeated by Cortés and
his forces on his second return with the help of state of Tlaxcala whose
population estimate was 300,000. The native population declined 80–90% by 1600
to 1–2.5 million. Any population estimate of pre-Columbian Mexico is bound to be
a guess but 8–12 million is often suggested for the area encompassed by the
modern nation.

Smallpox was a devastating disease: it generally killed Aztecs but not
Spaniards, who as Europeans had already been exposed to it in their cities for
centuries and therefore had developed acquired immunity. The deaths caused by
smallpox are believed to have triggered a rapid growth of Christianity in Mexico
and the Americas. At first, the Aztecs believed the epidemic was a punishment
from an angry god, but they later accepted their fate and no longer resisted the
Spanish rule. Many of the surviving Aztecs believed that smallpox could be
credited to the superiority of the Christian god, which resulted in their
acceptance of Catholicism and yielding to the Spanish rule throughout Mexico.

The territory became part of the Spanish Empire under the name of New Spain.
Mexico City was systematically rebuilt by Cortés following the Fall of
Tenochtitlan in 1521. Much of the identity, traditions and architecture of
Mexico developed during the 300-year colonial period.

The capture of Tenochtitlan and refounding of Mexico City in 1521, marked the
beginning of a 300-year-long colonial era during which Mexico was known as Nueva
España (New Spain). The Kingdom of New Spain was created from the remnants of
the Aztec hegemonic empire. Subsequent enlargements, such as the conquest of the
Tarascan state, resulted in the creation of the Viceroyalty of New Spain in
1535. The Viceroyalty at its greatest extent included the territories of modern
Mexico, Central America as far south as Costa Rica, and the western United
States. The Viceregal capital Mexico City also administrated the Spanish West
Indies (The Caribbean), the Spanish East Indies (The Philippines) and Spanish
Florida.

The indigenous population stabilized around one to one and a half million
individuals in the 17th century from the most commonly accepted five to ten
million pre-contact population. The population decline was primarily the result
of communicable diseases (particularly small pox) introduced during the
Columbian Exchange. During the three hundred years of the colonial era, Mexico
received some 400,000 to half a million Europeans, 200,000 to 250,000 Africans
and 40,000 to 120,000 Asians. The 18th century saw a great increase in the
percentage of mestizos (The Penguin Atlas of World Population History,
pp. 291–92).

Colonial law with Spanish roots was introduced and attached to native customs
creating a hierarchy between local jurisdiction (the Cabildos) and the Spanish
Crown. Whereby upper administrative offices were closed to the natives, even
those of pure Spanish blood (criollos). Administration was based on the racial
separation of the population among "Republics" of Spaniards, Amerindians and
castas, autonomous and directly dependent on the king himself.

The Council of Indies and the mendicant religious orders, which arrived in
Mesoamerica as early as 1524, labored to generate capital for the crown of Spain
and convert the Amerindian populations to Catholicism. The 1531 Marian
apparitions to Saint Juan Diego gave impetus to the evangelization of central
Mexico. The Virgin of Guadalupe became a symbol of criollo patriotism and was
used by the insurgents that followed Miguel Hidalgo during the War of
Independence. Some Crypto-Jewish families emigrated to Mexico to escape the
Spanish Inquisition.

The rich deposits of silver, particularly in Zacatecas and Guanajuato, resulted
in silver extraction dominating the economy of New Spain. Taxes on silver
production became a major source of income for Spain. Other important industries
were the haciendas (functioning under the encomienda and repartimiento systems)
and mercantile activities in the main cities and ports. Wealth created during
the colonial era spurred the development of New Spanish Baroque.

As a result of its trade links with Asia, the rest of the Americas, Africa and
Europe and the profound effect of New World silver, central Mexico was one of
the first regions to be incorporated into a globalized economy. Being at the
crossroads of trade, people and cultures, Mexico City has been called the "first
world city". The Nao de China (Manila Galleons) operated for two and a half
centuries and connected New Spain with Asia. From Veracruz, goods would be taken
to Atlantic ports in the Americas and Spain. Veracruz was also the main port of
entry in mainland New Spain for European goods and immigrants and African
slaves. The Camino Real de Tierra Adentro connected Mexico City with the
interior of New Spain.

Due to the importance of central New Spain, Mexico boasts various firsts in the
Americas, including: first printing shop (1539), first university (1551), first
public park (1592) and the first public library (1646). Important artists of the
colonial period, include the writers Juan Ruiz de Alarcón and Sor Juana Inés de
la Cruz, painters Cristóbal de Villalpando and Miguel Cabrera, and architect
Manuel Tolsá. The Academy of San Carlos was the first major school and museum of
art in the Americas. Scientist Andrés Manuel del Río Fernández was the first to
discover the element vanadium.

Spanish forces, sommetimes accompanied by native allies, led expeditions to
conquer territory or quelsh rebellions through the colonial era. Notable
Amerindian revolts in sporadically populated northern New Spain include the
Chichimeca War (1576–1606), Tepehuán Revolt (1616–1620) and the Pueblo Revolt
(1680). In order to protect Mexico from the attacks of English, French and Dutch
pirates and protect the Crown's monopoly of revenue only two ports were open to
foreign trade— Veracruz on the Atlantic and Acapulco on the Pacific. Among the
best known pirate attacks are the 1663 Sack of Campeche and 1683 Attack on
Veracruz.

Many Mexican cultural traits like tequila (first distilled in the 16th century),
charreria (17th), mariachi (18th) and Mexican cuisine (a syncretic cuisine)
arose during the colonial era.

On September 16, 1810, a "loyalist revolt" against the ruling Junta was declared
by priest Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla, in the small town of Dolores, Guanajuato.
The first insurgent group was formed by Hidalgo, the Spanish viceregal army
captain Ignacio Allende, the militia captain Juan Aldama and "La Corregidora"
Josefa Ortiz de Domínguez. Hidalgo and some of his soldiers were captured and
executed by firing squad in Chihuahua, on July 31, 1811. Following his death,
the leadership was assumed by priest José María Morelos, who occupied key
southern cities.

In 1813 the Congress of Chilpancingo was convened and, on November 6, signed the
"Solemn Act of the Declaration of Independence of Northern America". Morelos was
captured and executed on December 22, 1815.

In subsequent years, the insurgency was near collapse, but in 1820 Viceroy Juan
Ruiz de Apodaca sent an army under the criollo general Agustín de Iturbide
against the troops of Vicente Guerrero. Instead, Iturbide approached Guerrero to
join forces, and on August 24, 1821 representatives of the Spanish Crown and
Iturbide signed the "Treaty of Córdoba" and the "Declaration of Independence of
the Mexican Empire", which recognized the independence of Mexico under the terms
of the "Plan of Iguala".

Mexico’s short recovery after the War of Independence was soon cut short again
by the civil wars and institutional instability of the 1850s, which lasted until
the government of Porfirio Díaz reestablished conditions that paved the way for
economic growth. The conflicts that arose from the mid-1850s had a profound
effect because they were widespread and made themselves perceptible in the vast
rural areas of the countries, involved clashes between castes, different ethnic
groups and haciendas, and entailed a deepening of the political and ideological
divisions between republicans and monarchists.

Agustín de Iturbide became constitutional emperor of the First Mexican Empire in
1822. A revolt against him in 1823 established the United Mexican States. In
1824, a Republican Constitution was drafted and Guadalupe Victoria became the
first president of the newly born country. In 1829 president Guerrero abolished
slavery. The first decades of the post-independence period were marked by
economic instability, which led to the Pastry War in 1836. There was constant
strife between liberales, supporters of a federal form of government, and
conservadores, who proposed a hierarchical form of government.[citation needed]

During this period, the frontier borderlands to the north became quite isolated
from the government in Mexico City, and its monopolistic economic policies
caused suffering. With limited trade, the people had difficulty meeting tax
payments and resented the central government's actions in collecting customs.
Resentment built up from California to Texas. Both the mission system and the
presidios had collapsed after the Spanish withdrew from the colony, causing
great disruption especially in Alta California and New Mexico. The people in the
borderlands had to raise local militias to protect themselves from hostile
Native Americans. These areas developed in different directions from the center
of the country.

Wanting to stabilize and develop the frontier, Mexico encouraged immigration
into present-day Texas, as they were unable to persuade people from central
Mexico to move into those areas. They allowed for religious freedom for the new
settlers, who were primarily Protestant English speakers from the United States.
Within several years, the Anglos far outnumbered the Tejano in the area.
Itinerant traders traveled through the area, working by free market principles.
The Tejano grew more separate from the government and due to its neglect, many
supported the idea of independence and joined movements to that end,
collaborating with the English-speaking Americans.

General Antonio López de Santa Anna, a centralist and two-time dictator,
approved the Siete Leyes in 1836, a radical amendment that institutionalized the
centralized form of government. When he suspended the 1824 Constitution, civil
war spread across the country. Three new governments declared independence: the
Republic of Texas, the Republic of the Rio Grande and the Republic of Yucatán.

The 1846 United States annexation of the Republic of Texas and subsequent
American military incursion into territory that was part of Coahuila (also
claimed by Texas) instigated the Mexican–American War. The war was settled in
1848 via the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. Mexico was forced to give up more than
one-third of its land to the U.S., including Alta California, Santa Fe de Nuevo
México and the territory claimed by Texas. A much smaller transfer of territory
in what is today southern Arizona and southwestern New Mexico—known as the
Gadsden Purchase—occurred in 1854.

The Caste War of Yucatán, the Maya uprising that began in 1847, was one of the
most successful modern Native American revolts. Maya rebels, or Cruzob,
maintained relatively independent enclaves in the peninsula until the 1930s.

Dissatisfaction with Santa Anna's return to power led to the liberal "Plan of
Ayutla", initiating an era known as La Reforma. The new Constitution drafted in
1857 established a secular state, federalism as the form of government, and
several freedoms. As the conservadores refused to recognize it, the Reform War
began in 1858, during which both groups had their own governments. The war ended
in 1861 with victory by the Liberals, led by president Benito Juárez, who was an
ethnic Zapotec.

In the 1860s Mexico was occupied by France, which established the Second Mexican
Empire under the rule of the Habsburg Archduke Ferdinand Maximilian of Austria
with support from the Roman Catholic clergy and the conservadores. The latter
switched sides and joined the liberales. Maximilian surrendered, was tried on
June 14, 1867, and was executed a few days later on June 19 in Querétaro.

Porfirio Díaz, a republican general during the French intervention, was elected
the 29th president in 1876. The 1880 election was won by Manuel González Flores.
Díaz was reelected in 1884 and ruled until 1911. The period, known as the
Porfiriato, was characterized by economic stability and growth, significant
foreign investment and influence, investments in the arts and sciences and an
expansion of the railroad network and telecommunications. The period was
concurrent with the Gilded Age in the US and Belle Époque in France and was also
marked by economic inequality and political repression.

Díaz ruled with a group of confidants that became known as the científicos
("scientists"). The most influential cientifco was Secretary of Finance José
Yves Limantour. The Porfirian regime was influenced by positivism. They rejected
theology and idealism in favor of scientific methods being applied towards
national development. Various iconic buildings and monuments were initiated by
Díaz, including the Palacio de Bellas Artes, Palacio de Correos de Mexico,
Monumento a la Independencia and the Palacio Legislativo (which became the
Monumento a la Revolución).

President Díaz announced in 1908 that he would retire in 1911, resulting in the
development of new coalitions. But then he ran for reelection anyway and in a
show of U.S. support, Díaz and William Howard Taft planned a summit in El Paso,
Texas, and Ciudad Juárez, Mexico, for October 16, 1909, an historic first
meeting between a Mexican and a U.S. president and also the first time an
American president would cross the border into Mexico. Both sides agreed that
the disputed Chamizal strip connecting El Paso to Ciudad Juárez would be
considered neutral territory with no flags present during the summit, but the
meeting focused attention on this territory and resulted in assassination
threats and other serious security concerns.

On the day of the summit, Frederick Russell Burnham, the celebrated scout, and
Private C.R. Moore, a Texas Ranger, discovered a man holding a concealed palm
pistol standing at the El Paso Chamber of Commerce building along the procession
route, and they disarmed the assassin within only a few feet of Díaz and Taft.
Both presidents were unharmed and the summit was held. Díaz was re-elected in
1910, but alleged electoral fraud forced him into exile in France and sparked
the 1910 Mexican Revolution, initially led by Francisco I. Madero.

Madero was elected president but overthrown and murdered in a coup d'état two
years later directed by conservative general Victoriano Huerta. That event
re-ignited the civil war, involving figures such as Francisco Villa and Emiliano
Zapata, who formed their own forces. A third force, the constitutional army led
by Venustiano Carranza managed to bring an end to the war, and radically amended
the 1857 Constitution to include many of the social premises and demands of the
revolutionaries into what was eventually called the 1917 Constitution. It is
estimated that the war killed 900,000 of the 1910 population of 15 million.

Assassinated in 1920, Carranza was succeeded by another revolutionary hero,
Álvaro Obregón, who in turn was succeeded by Plutarco Elías Calles. Obregón was
reelected in 1928 but assassinated before he could assume power. Although this
period is usually referred to as the Mexican Revolution, it might also be termed
a civil war since president Díaz (1909) narrowly escaped assassination and
presidents Francisco I. Madero (1913), Venustiano Carranza (1920), Álvaro
Obregón (1928), and former revolutionary leaders Emiliano Zapata (1919) and
Pancho Villa (1923) all were assassinated during this period.

In 1929, Calles founded the National Revolutionary Party (PNR), later renamed
the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), and started a period known as the
Maximato, which ended with the election of Lázaro Cárdenas, who implemented many
economic and social reforms. This included the Mexican oil expropriation in
March 1938, which nationalized the U.S. and Anglo-Dutch oil company known as the
Mexican Eagle Petroleum Company. This movement would result in the creation of
the state-owned Mexican oil company known as Pemex. This sparked a diplomatic
crisis with the countries whose citizens had lost businesses by Cárdenas'
radical measure, but since then the company has played an important role in the
economic development of Mexico.

Between 1940 and 1980, Mexico remained a poor country but experienced
substantial economic growth that some historians call the "Mexican miracle".
Although the economy continued to flourish for some, social inequality remained
a factor of discontent. Moreover, the PRI rule became increasingly authoritarian
and at times oppressive in what is now referred to as 'Mexico's dirty war' (see
the 1968 Tlatelolco massacre, which claimed the life of around 300 protesters
based on conservative estimates and as many as 800 protesters).

Electoral reforms and high oil prices followed the administration of Luis
Echeverría, mismanagement of these revenues led to inflation and exacerbated the
1982 Crisis. That year, oil prices plunged, interest rates soared, and the
government defaulted on its debt. President Miguel de la Madrid resorted to
currency devaluations which in turn sparked inflation.

In the 1980s the first cracks emerged in PRI's monopolistic position. In Baja
California, Ernesto Ruffo Appel was elected as governor. In 1988, alleged
electoral fraud prevented the leftist candidate Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas from winning
the national presidential elections, giving Carlos Salinas de Gortari the
presidency and leading to massive protests in Mexico City.

Salinas embarked on a program of neoliberal reforms which fixed the exchange
rate, controlled inflation and culminated with the signing of the North American
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), which came into effect on January 1, 1994. The
same day, the Zapatista Army of National Liberation (EZLN) started a
two-week-long armed rebellion against the federal government, and has continued
as a non-violent opposition movement against neoliberalism and globalization.

In 1994, Salinas was succeeded by Ernesto Zedillo, followed by the Mexican peso
crisis and a $50 billion IMF bailout. Major macroeconomic reforms were started
by President Zedillo, and the economy rapidly recovered and growth peaked at
almost 7% by the end of 1999.

In 2000, after 71 years, the PRI lost a presidential election to Vicente Fox of
the opposition National Action Party (PAN). In the 2006 presidential election,
Felipe Calderón from the PAN was declared the winner, with a very narrow margin
over leftist politician Andrés Manuel López Obrador of the Party of the
Democratic Revolution (PRD). López Obrador, however, contested the election and
pledged to create an "alternative government".

After twelve years, in 2012, the PRI won the Presidency again with the election
of Enrique Peña Nieto, the governor of the State of Mexico from 2005–2011.
However, he won with only a plurality of about 38%, and did not have a
legislative majority.

Mexico is located between latitudes 14° and 33°N, and longitudes 86° and 119°W
in the southern portion of North America.[citation needed] Almost all of Mexico
lies in the North American Plate, with small parts of the Baja California
peninsula on the Pacific and Cocos Plates. Geophysically, some geographers
include the territory east of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec (around 12% of the
total) within Central America. Geopolitically, however, Mexico is entirely
considered part of North America, along with Canada and the United States.

Mexico's total area is 1,972,550 km2 (761,606 sq mi), making it the world's 14th
largest country by total area, and includes approximately 6,000 km2
(2,317 sq mi) of islands in the Pacific Ocean (including the remote Guadalupe
Island and the Revillagigedo Islands), Gulf of Mexico, Caribbean, and Gulf of
California. From its farthest land points, Mexico is a little over 2,000 mi
(3,219 km) in length.

On its north, Mexico shares a 3,141 km (1,952 mi) border with the United States.
The meandering Río Bravo del Norte (known as the Rio Grande in the United
States) defines the border from Ciudad Juárez east to the Gulf of Mexico. A
series of natural and artificial markers delineate the United States-Mexican
border west from Ciudad Juárez to the Pacific Ocean. Donald Trump made the
construction of a border wall (on the U.S. side) an element of his 2016
presidential campaign. On its south, Mexico shares an 871 km (541 mi) border
with Guatemala and a 251 km (156 mi) border with Belize.

Mexico is crossed from north to south by two mountain ranges known as Sierra
Madre Oriental and Sierra Madre Occidental, which are the extension of the Rocky
Mountains from northern North America. From east to west at the center, the
country is crossed by the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt also known as the Sierra
Nevada. A fourth mountain range, the Sierra Madre del Sur, runs from Michoacán
to Oaxaca.

As such, the majority of the Mexican central and northern territories are
located at high altitudes, and the highest elevations are found at the
Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt: Pico de Orizaba (5,700 m or 18,701 ft),
Popocatepetl (5,462 m or 17,920 ft) and Iztaccihuatl (5,286 m or 17,343 ft) and
the Nevado de Toluca (4,577 m or 15,016 ft). Three major urban agglomerations
are located in the valleys between these four elevations: Toluca, Greater Mexico
City and Puebla.

The Tropic of Cancer effectively divides the country into temperate and tropical
zones. Land north of the twenty-fourth parallel experiences cooler temperatures
during the winter months. South of the twenty-fourth parallel, temperatures are
fairly constant year round and vary solely as a function of elevation. This
gives Mexico one of the world's most diverse weather systems.

Areas south of the 24th parallel with elevations up to 1,000 m (3,281 ft) (the
southern parts of both coastal plains as well as the Yucatán Peninsula), have a
yearly median temperature between 24 to 28 °C (75.2 to 82.4 °F). Temperatures
here remain high throughout the year, with only a 5 °C (9 °F) difference between
winter and summer median temperatures. Both Mexican coasts, except for the south
coast of the Bay of Campeche and northern Baja, are also vulnerable to serious
hurricanes during the summer and fall. Although low-lying areas north of the
24th parallel are hot and humid during the summer, they generally have lower
yearly temperature averages (from 20 to 24 °C or 68.0 to 75.2 °F) because of
more moderate conditions during the winter.

Many parts of Mexico, particularly the north, have a dry climate with sporadic
rainfall while parts of the tropical lowlands in the south average more than
2,000 mm (78.7 in) of annual precipitation. For example, many cities in the
north like Monterrey, Hermosillo, and Mexicali experience temperatures of 40 °C
(104 °F) or more in summer. In the Sonoran Desert temperatures reach 50 °C
(122 °F) or more.

In 2012, Mexico passed a comprehensive climate change bill, a first in the
developing world, that has set a goal for the country to generate 35% of its
energy from clean energy sources by 2024, and to cut emissions by 50% by 2050,
from the level found in 2000. During the 2016 North American Leaders' Summit,
the target of 50% of electricity generated from renewable sources by 2025 was
announced.

Mexico ranks fourth in the world in biodiversity and is one of the 17
megadiverse countries. With over 200,000 different species, Mexico is home of
10–12% of the world's biodiversity. Mexico ranks first in biodiversity in
reptiles with 707 known species, second in mammals with 438 species, fourth in
amphibians with 290 species, and fourth in flora, with 26,000 different species.
Mexico is also considered the second country in the world in ecosystems and
fourth in overall species. Approximately 2,500 species are protected by Mexican
legislations.

In 2002[update], Mexico had the second fastest rate of deforestation in the
world, second only to Brazil. The government has taken another initiative in the
late 1990s to broaden the people's knowledge, interest and use of the country's
esteemed biodiversity, through the Comisión Nacional para el Conocimiento y Uso
de la Biodiversidad.

In Mexico, 170,000 square kilometres (65,637 sq mi) are considered "Protected
Natural Areas." These include 34 biosphere reserves (unaltered ecosystems), 67
national parks, 4 natural monuments (protected in perpetuity for their
aesthetic, scientific or historical value), 26 areas of protected flora and
fauna, 4 areas for natural resource protection (conservation of soil,
hydrological basins and forests) and 17 sanctuaries (zones rich in diverse
species).

The discovery of the Americas brought to the rest of the world many widely used
food crops and edible plants. Some of Mexico's native culinary ingredients
include: chocolate, avocado, tomato, maize, vanilla, guava, chayote, epazote,
camote, jícama, nopal, zucchini, tejocote, huitlacoche, sapote, mamey sapote,
many varieties of beans, and an even greater variety of chiles, such as the
habanero and the jalapeño. Most of these names come from indigenous languages
like Nahuatl.

Because of its high biodiversity Mexico has also been a frequent site of
bioprospecting by international research bodies. The first highly successful
instance being the discovery in 1947 of the tuber "Barbasco" (Dioscorea
composita) which has a high content of diosgenin, revolutionizing the production
of synthetic hormones in the 1950s and 1960s and eventually leading to the
invention of combined oral contraceptive pills.

The United Mexican States are a federation whose government is representative,
democratic and republican based on a presidential system according to the 1917
Constitution. The constitution establishes three levels of government: the
federal Union, the state governments and the municipal governments. According to
the constitution, all constituent states of the federation must have a
republican form of government composed of three branches: the executive,
represented by a governor and an appointed cabinet, the legislative branch
constituted by a unicameral congress and the judiciary, which will include a
state Supreme Court of Justice. They also have their own civil and judicial
codes.

The federal legislature is the bicameral Congress of the Union, composed of the
Senate of the Republic and the Chamber of Deputies. The Congress makes federal
law, declares war, imposes taxes, approves the national budget and international
treaties, and ratifies diplomatic appointments.

The federal Congress, as well as the state legislatures, are elected by a system
of parallel voting that includes plurality and proportional representation. The
Chamber of Deputies has 500 deputies. Of these, 300 are elected by plurality
vote in single-member districts (the federal electoral districts) and 200 are
elected by proportional representation with closed party lists for which the
country is divided into five electoral constituencies. The Senate is made up of
128 senators. Of these, 64 senators (two for each state and two for the Federal
District) are elected by plurality vote in pairs; 32 senators are the first
minority or first-runner up (one for each state and one for the Federal
District), and 32 are elected by proportional representation from national
closed party lists.

The executive is the President of the United Mexican States, who is the head of
state and government, as well as the commander-in-chief of the Mexican military
forces. The President also appoints the Cabinet and other officers. The
President is responsible for executing and enforcing the law, and has the power
to veto bills.

The highest organ of the judicial branch of government is the Supreme Court of
Justice, the national supreme court, which has eleven judges appointed by the
President and approved by the Senate. The Supreme Court of Justice interprets
laws and judges cases of federal competency. Other institutions of the judiciary
are the Federal Electoral Tribunal, collegiate, unitary and district tribunals,
and the Council of the Federal Judiciary.

Three parties have historically been the dominant parties in Mexican politics:
the National Action Party: a conservative party founded in 1939 and belonging to
the Christian Democrat Organization of America; the Institutional Revolutionary
Party, a center-left party and member of Socialist International that was
founded in 1929 to unite all the factions of the Mexican Revolution and held an
almost hegemonic power in Mexican politics since then; the Party of the
Democratic Revolution: a left-wing party, founded in 1989 as the successor of
the coalition of socialists and liberal parties.

Public security is enacted at the three levels of government, each of which has
different prerogatives and responsibilities. Local and state police departments
are primarily in charge of law enforcement, whereas the Mexican Federal Police
are in charge of specialized duties. All levels report to the Secretaría de
Seguridad Pública (Secretary of Public Security). The General Attorney's Office
(Procuraduría General de la República, PGR) is the executive power's agency in
charge of investigating and prosecuting crimes at the federal level, mainly
those related to drug and arms trafficking, espionage, and bank robberies. The
PGR operates the Federal Investigations Agency (Agencia Federal de
Investigación, AFI) an investigative and preventive agency.

While the government generally respects the human rights of its citizens,
serious abuses of power have been reported in security operations in the
southern part of the country and in indigenous communities and poor urban
neighborhoods. The National Human Rights Commission has had little impact in
reversing this trend, engaging mostly in documentation but failing to use its
powers to issue public condemnations to the officials who ignore its
recommendations. By law, all defendants have the rights that assure them fair
trials and humane treatment; however, the system is overburdened and overwhelmed
with several problems.

Despite the efforts of the authorities to fight crime and fraud, most Mexicans
have low confidence in the police or the judicial system, and therefore, few
crimes are actually reported by the citizens. The Global Integrity Index which
measures the existence and effectiveness of national anti-corruption mechanisms
rated Mexico 31st behind Kenya, Thailand, and Russia. In 2008, president
Calderón proposed a major reform of the judicial system, which was approved by
the Congress of the Union, which included oral trials, the presumption of
innocence for defendants, the authority of local police to investigate
crime—until then a prerogative of special police units—and several other changes
intended to speed up trials.

Drug cartels are a major concern in Mexico. Mexico's drug war has left over
60,000 dead and perhaps another 20,000 missing. The Mexican drug cartels have as
many as 100,000 members. The Mexican government's National Geography and
Statistics Institute estimated that there were 41,563 crimes per 100,000
residents in 2012.

President Felipe Calderón made abating organized crime one of the top priorities
of his administration by deploying military personnel to cities where drug
cartels operate. This move was criticized by the opposition parties and the
National Human Rights Commission for escalating the violence, but its effects
have been positively evaluated by the US State Department's Bureau for
International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs as having obtained
"unprecedented results" with "many important successes".

Since President Felipe Calderón launched a crackdown against cartels in 2006,
more than 28,000 alleged criminals have been killed. Of the total drug-related
violence 4% are innocent people, mostly by-passers and people trapped in between
shootings; 90% accounts for criminals and 6% for military personnel and police
officers. In October 2007, President Calderón and US president George W. Bush
announced the Mérida Initiative, a plan of law enforcement cooperation between
the two countries.

The foreign relations of Mexico are directed by the President of Mexico and
managed through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The principles of the foreign
policy are constitutionally recognized in the Article 89, Section 10, which
include: respect for international law and legal equality of states, their
sovereignty and independence, non-intervention in the domestic affairs of other
countries, peaceful resolution of conflicts, and promotion of collective
security through active participation in international organizations. Since the
1930s, the Estrada Doctrine has served as a crucial complement to these
principles.

Mexico is one of the founding members of several international organizations,
most notably the United Nations, the Organization of American States, the
Organization of Ibero-American States, the OPANAL and the Rio Group. In 2008,
Mexico contributed over 40 million dollars to the United Nations regular budget.
In addition, it was the only Latin American member of the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development since it joined in 1994 until Chile gained
full membership in 2010.

Mexico is considered a regional power hence its presence in major economic
groups such as the G8+5 and the G-20. In addition, since the 1990s Mexico has
sought a reform of the United Nations Security Council and its working methods
with the support of Canada, Italy, Pakistan and other nine countries, which form
a group informally called the Coffee Club.

After the War of Independence, the relations of Mexico were focused primarily on
the United States, its northern neighbor, largest trading partner, and the most
powerful actor in hemispheric and world affairs. Mexico supported the Cuban
government since its establishment in the early 1960s, the Sandinista revolution
in Nicaragua during the late 1970s, and leftist revolutionary groups in El
Salvador during the 1980s. Felipe Calderón's administration put a greater
emphasis on relations with Latin America and the Caribbean.

The Mexican Armed Forces have two branches: the Mexican Army (which includes the
Mexican Air Force), and the Mexican Navy. The Mexican Armed Forces maintain
significant infrastructure, including facilities for design, research, and
testing of weapons, vehicles, aircraft, naval vessels, defense systems and
electronics; military industry manufacturing centers for building such systems,
and advanced naval dockyards that build heavy military vessels and advanced
missile technologies.

In recent years, Mexico has improved its training techniques, military command
and information structures and has taken steps to becoming more self-reliant in
supplying its military by designing as well as manufacturing its own arms,
missiles, aircraft, vehicles, heavy weaponry, electronics, defense systems,
armor, heavy military industrial equipment and heavy naval vessels. Since the
1990s, when the military escalated its role in the war on drugs, increasing
importance has been placed on acquiring airborne surveillance platforms,
aircraft, helicopters, digital war-fighting technologies, urban warfare
equipment and rapid troop transport.

Mexico has the capabilities to manufacture nuclear weapons, but abandoned this
possibility with the Treaty of Tlatelolco in 1968 and pledged to only use its
nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. In 1970, Mexico's national institute
for nuclear research successfully refined weapons grade uranium[not in citation
given] which is used in the manufacture of nuclear weapons but in April 2010,
Mexico agreed to turn over its weapons grade uranium to the United States.

Historically, Mexico has remained neutral in international conflicts, with the
exception of World War II. However, in recent years some political parties have
proposed an amendment of the Constitution in order to allow the Mexican Army,
Air Force or Navy to collaborate with the United Nations in peacekeeping
missions, or to provide military help to countries that officially ask for it.

The United Mexican States are a federation of 31 free and sovereign states,
which form a union that exercises a degree of jurisdiction over the Federal
District and other territories.

Each state has its own constitution, congress, and a judiciary, and its citizens
elect by direct voting a governor for a six-year term, and representatives to
their respective unicameral state congresses for three-year terms.

The Federal District is a special political division that belongs to the
federation as a whole and not to a particular state, and as such, has more
limited local rule than the nation's states.

The states are divided into municipalities, the smallest administrative
political entity in the country, governed by a mayor or municipal president
(presidente municipal), elected by its residents by plurality.

Mexico has the 15th largest nominal GDP and the 11th largest by purchasing power
parity. GDP annual average growth for the period of 1995–2002 was 5.1%. Mexico's
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in purchasing power parity (PPP) was estimated at
US $2.2602 trillion in 2015, and $1.3673 trillion in nominal exchange rates.
Mexico's GDP in PPP per capita was US $18,714.05. The World Bank reported in
2009 that the country's Gross National Income in market exchange rates was the
second highest in Latin America, after Brazil at US $1,830.392 billion, which
lead to the highest income per capita in the region at $14,400. Mexico is now
firmly established as an upper middle-income country. After the slowdown of 2001
the country has recovered and has grown 4.2, 3.0 and 4.8 percent in 2004, 2005
and 2006, even though it is considered to be well below Mexico's potential
growth. Furthermore, after the 2008–2009 recession, the economy grew an average
of 3.32 percent per year from 2010 to 2014.

From the late 1990s onwards, the majority of the population has been part of the
growing middle class. But from 2004 to 2008 the portion of the population who
received less than half of the median income has risen from 17% to 21% and the
absolute levels of poverty rose from 2006 to 2010, with a rise in persons living
in extreme or moderate poverty rising from 35 to 46% (52 million persons). This
is also reflected by the fact that infant mortality in Mexico is three times
higher than the average among OECD nations, and the literacy levels are in the
median range of OECD nations. Nevertheless, according to Goldman Sachs, by 2050
Mexico will have the 5th largest economy in the world.

Among the OECD countries, Mexico has the second highest degree of economic
disparity between the extremely poor and extremely rich, after Chile – although
it has been falling over the last decade, being only one of few countries in
which this is the case. The bottom ten percent in the income hierarchy disposes
of 1.36% of the country's resources, whereas the upper ten percent dispose of
almost 36%. OECD also notes that Mexico's budgeted expenses for poverty
alleviation and social development is only about a third of the OECD average –
both in absolute and relative numbers.

According to a 2008 UN report the average income in a typical urbanized area of
Mexico was $26,654, while the average income in rural areas just miles away was
only $8,403. Daily minimum wages are set annually by law and determined by zone;
$67.29 Mexican pesos ($5.13 USD) in Zone A and $63.77 Mexican pesos ($4.86 USD)
in Zone B.

The electronics industry of Mexico has grown enormously within the last decade.
Mexico has the sixth largest electronics industry in the world after China,
United States, Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan. Mexico is the second largest
exporter of electronics to the United States where it exported $71.4 billion
worth of electronics in 2011. The Mexican electronics industry is dominated by
the manufacture and OEM design of televisions, displays, computers, mobile
phones, circuit boards, semiconductors, electronic appliances, communications
equipment and LCD modules. The Mexican electronics industry grew 20% between
2010 and 2011, up from its constant growth rate of 17% between 2003 and 2009.
Currently electronics represent 30% of Mexico's exports.

Mexico produces the most automobiles of any North American nation. The industry
produces technologically complex components and engages in some research and
development activities. The "Big Three" (General Motors, Ford and Chrysler) have
been operating in Mexico since the 1930s, while Volkswagen and Nissan built
their plants in the 1960s. In Puebla alone, 70 industrial part-makers cluster
around Volkswagen. In the 2010s expansion of the sector was surging. In 2014
alone, more than $10 billion in investment was committed. Kia Motors in August
2014 announced plans for a $1 billion factory in Nuevo León. At the time
Mercedes-Benz and Nissan were already building a $1.4 billion plant near Puebla,
while BMW was planning a $1-billion assembly plant in San Luis Potosí.
Additionally, Audi began building a $1.3 billion factory near Puebla in 2013.

The domestic car industry is represented by DINA S.A., which has built buses and
trucks since 1962, and the new Mastretta company that builds the
high-performance Mastretta MXT sports car. In 2006, trade with the United States
and Canada accounted for almost 50% of Mexico's exports and 45% of its imports.
During the first three quarters of 2010, the United States had a $46.0 billion
trade deficit with Mexico. In August 2010 Mexico surpassed France to become the
9th largest holder of US debt. The commercial and financial dependence on the US
is a cause for concern.

The remittances from Mexican citizens working in the United States account for
0.2% of Mexico's GDP which was equal to US$20 billion per year in 2004 and is
the tenth largest source of foreign income after oil, industrial exports,
manufactured goods, electronics, heavy industry, automobiles, construction,
food, banking and financial services. According to Mexico's central bank,
remittances in 2008 amounted to $25bn.

Major players in the broadcasting industry are Televisa, the largest Spanish
media company in the Spanish-speaking world, and TV Azteca.

The telecommunications industry is mostly dominated by Telmex (Teléfonos de
México), privatized in 1990. By 2006, Telmex had expanded its operations to
Colombia, Peru, Chile, Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay and the United States.
Other players in the domestic industry are Axtel and Maxcom. Because of Mexican
orography, providing a landline telephone service at remote mountainous areas is
expensive, and the penetration of line-phones per capita is low compared to
other Latin American countries, at 40 percent; however, 82% of Mexicans over the
age of 14 own a mobile phone. Mobile telephony has the advantage of reaching all
areas at a lower cost, and the total number of mobile lines is almost two times
that of landlines, with an estimation of 63 million lines. The telecommunication
industry is regulated by the government through Cofetel (Comisión Federal de
Telecomunicaciones).

The Mexican satellite system is domestic and operates 120 earth stations. There
is also extensive microwave radio relay network and considerable use of
fiber-optic and coaxial cable. Mexican satellites are operated by Satélites
Mexicanos (Satmex), a private company, leader in Latin America and servicing
both North and South America. It offers broadcast, telephone and
telecommunication services to 37 countries in the Americas, from Canada to
Argentina. Through business partnerships Satmex provides high-speed connectivity
to ISPs and Digital Broadcast Services. Satmex maintains its own satellite fleet
with most of the fleet being designed and built in Mexico.

The use of radio, television, and Internet in Mexico is prevalent. There are
approximately 1,410 radio broadcast stations and 236 television stations
(excluding repeaters). Major players in the broadcasting industry are
Televisa—the largest media company in the Spanish-speaking world—and TV Azteca.

Energy production in Mexico is managed by state-owned companies: the Federal
Commission of Electricity and Pemex.

Pemex, the public company in charge of exploration, extraction, transportation
and marketing of crude oil and natural gas, as well as the refining and
distribution of petroleum products and petrochemicals, is one of the largest
companies in the world by revenue, making US $86 billion in sales a year. Mexico
is the sixth-largest oil producer in the world, with 3.7 million barrels per
day. In 1980 oil exports accounted for 61.6% of total exports; by 2000 it was
only 7.3%.

The largest hydro plant in Mexico is the 2,400 MW Manuel Moreno Torres Dam in
Chicoasén, Chiapas, in the Grijalva River. This is the world's fourth most
productive hydroelectric plant.

Mexico is the country with the world's third largest solar potential. The
country's gross solar potential is estimated at 5kWh/m2 daily, which corresponds
to 50 times national electricity generation. Currently, there is over 1 million
square meters of solar thermal panels installed in Mexico, while in 2005, there
were 115,000 square meters of solar PV (photo-voltaic). It is expected that in
2012 there will be 1,8 million square meters of installed solar thermal panels.

The project named SEGH-CFE 1, located in Puerto Libertad, Sonora, Northwest of
Mexico, will have capacity of 46.8 MW from an array of 187,200 solar panels when
complete in 2013. All of the electricity will be sold directly to the CFE and
absorbed into the utility's transmission system for distribution throughout
their existing network. At an installed capacity of 46.8 MWp, when complete in
2013, the project will be the first utility scale project of its kind in Mexico
and the largest solar project of any kind in Latin America.

The National Autonomous University of Mexico was officially established in 1910,
and the university become one of the most important institutes of higher
learning in Mexico. UNAM provides world class education in science, medicine,
and engineering. Many scientific institutes and new institutes of higher
learning, such as National Polytechnic Institute (founded in 1936), were
established during the first half of the 20th century. Most of the new research
institutes were created within UNAM. Twelve institutes were integrated into UNAM
from 1929 to 1973. In 1959, the Mexican Academy of Sciences was created to
coordinate scientific efforts between academics.

In 1995, the Mexican chemist Mario J. Molina shared the Nobel Prize in Chemistry
with Paul J. Crutzen and F. Sherwood Rowland for their work in atmospheric
chemistry, particularly concerning the formation and decomposition of ozone.
Molina, an alumnus of UNAM, became the first Mexican citizen to win the Nobel
Prize in science.

In recent years, the largest scientific project being developed in Mexico was
the construction of the Large Millimeter Telescope (Gran Telescopio Milimétrico,
GMT), the world's largest and most sensitive single-aperture telescope in its
frequency range. It was designed to observe regions of space obscured by stellar
dust.

Mexico has traditionally been among the most visited countries in the world
according to the World Tourism Organization and it is the most visited country
in the Americas, after the United States. The most notable attractions are the
Mesoamerican ruins, cultural festivals, colonial cities, nature reserves and the
beach resorts. The nation's wide range of climates, from temperate to tropical,
and unique culture – a fusion of the European and the Mesoamerican – make Mexico
an attractive destination. The peak tourism seasons in the country are during
December and the mid-Summer, with brief surges during the week before Easter and
Spring break, when many of the beach resort sites become popular destinations
for college students from the United States.

Mexico has the 23rd highest income from tourism in the world, and the highest in
Latin America. The vast majority of tourists come to Mexico from the United
States and Canada followed by Europe and Asia. A smaller number also come from
other Latin American countries. In the 2011 Travel and Tourism Competitiveness
Index report, Mexico was ranked 43rd in the world, which was 4th in the Americas
.

The coastlines of Mexico harbor many stretches of beaches that are frequented by
sun bathers and other visitors. On the Yucatán peninsula, one of the most
popular beach destinations is the resort town of Cancún, especially among
university students during spring break. Just offshore is the beach island of
Isla Mujeres, and to the east is the Isla Holbox. To the south of Cancun is the
coastal strip called Riviera Maya which includes the beach town of Playa del
Carmen and the ecological parks of Xcaret and Xel-Há. A day trip to the south of
Cancún is the historic port of Tulum. In addition to its beaches, the town of
Tulum is notable for its cliff-side Mayan ruins.

On the Pacific coast is the notable tourist destination of Acapulco. Once the
destination for the rich and famous, the beaches have become crowded and the
shores are now home to many multi-story hotels and vendors. Acapulco is home to
renowned cliff divers: trained divers who leap from the side of a vertical cliff
into the surf below.

At the southern tip of the Baja California peninsula is the resort town of Cabo
San Lucas, a town noted for its beaches and marlin fishing. Further north along
the Sea of Cortés is the Bahía de La Concepción, another beach town known for
its sports fishing. Closer to the United States border is the weekend draw of
San Felipe, Baja California.

The roadway network in Mexico is extensive and all areas in the country are
covered by it. The roadway network in Mexico has an extent of 366,095 km
(227,481 mi), of which 116,802 km (72,577 mi) are paved, making it the largest
paved-roadway network in Latin America. Of these, 10,474 km (6,508 mi) are
multi-lane expressways: 9,544 km (5,930 mi) are four-lane highways and the rest
have 6 or more lanes.

Mexico was one of the first Latin American countries to promote railway
development, and the network covers 30,952 km (19,233 mi). The Secretary of
Communications and Transport of Mexico proposed a high-speed rail link that will
transport its passengers from Mexico City to Guadalajara, Jalisco. The train,
which will travel at 300 kilometres per hour (190 miles per hour), will allow
passengers to travel from Mexico City to Guadalajara in just 2 hours. The whole
project was projected to cost 240 billion pesos, or about 25 billion US$ and is
being paid for jointly by the Mexican government and the local private sector
including the wealthiest man in the world, Mexico's billionaire business tycoon
Carlos Slim. The government of the state of Yucatán is also funding the
construction of a high speed line connecting the cities of Cozumel to Mérida and
Chichen Itza and Cancún.

Mexico has 233 airports with paved runways; of these, 35 carry 97% of the
passenger traffic. The Mexico City International Airport remains the largest in
Latin America and the 44th largest in the world transporting 21 million
passengers a year.

Among the achievements is a significant increase in access to piped water supply
in urban areas (88% to 93%) as well as in rural areas (50% to 74%) between 1990
and 2010. Additionally, a strong nationwide increase in access to improved
sanitation (64% to 85%) was observed in the same period. Other achievements
include the existence of a functioning national system to finance water and
sanitation infrastructure with a National Water Commission as its apex
institution; and the existence of a few well-performing utilities such as Aguas
y Drenaje de Monterrey.

The challenges include water scarcity in the northern and central parts of the
country; inadequate water service quality (drinking water quality; 55% of
Mexicans receiving water only intermittently according to results of the 2000
census); poor technical and commercial efficiency of most utilities (with an
average level of non-revenue water of 51% in 2003); an insufficient share of
wastewater receiving treatment (36% in 2006); and still inadequate access in
rural areas. In addition to on-going investments to expand access, the
government has embarked on a large investment program to improve wastewater
treatment.

The 2010 Census showed a population of 112,336,538, making it the most populous
Spanish-speaking country in the world. Between 2005 and 2010, the Mexican
population grew at an average of 1.70% per year, up from 1.16% per year between
2000 and 2005.

Prior to 2015, the Mexican government did not ask for the ethnicity nor race of
its citizens (last doing so in 1921). The number of indígenas (indigenous
peoples) was defined narrowly to speakers of one of Mexico's 62 indigenous
languages or connections to established indigenous communities. As a result, the
2010 census found that 14.86% of the population was indigenous. However,
beginning with the 2015 inter-census estimate, the government now asks whether
an individual self-identifies as indigenous (21.5% of the population) and/or
Afro-Mexican (1.2% of the population). These categories are not exclusionary and
an individual can indicate both indigenous and afro-descendant heritage. No
other groups (such as mestizos, whites or Asian-descendants) are quantified by
the government.

As of 2015[update], the foreign-born population was 1,007,063. The majority of
these individuals were born in the United States and Mexico is home to the
largest number of U.S. citizens abroad. After Americans the largest immigrant
groups are Guatemalans, Spaniards and Colombians. Besides the Spanish, large
immigrant-descended groups are the French, Germans, Lebanese and Chinese. Mexico
is the largest source of immigration to the United States. Some 11.6 million
residents of the United States have Mexican citizenship as of 2014[update].

Mexico is ethnically diverse; the various indigenous peoples, whites,
afro-descendants and mestizos are united under a single national identity. The
core part of Mexican national identity is formed on the basis of a synthesis of
cultures, primarily European culture and indigenous cultures, in a process known
as mestizaje, alluding to the mixed biological origins of the majority of
Mexicans. Mexican politicians and reformers such as José Vasconcelos (promoter
of the cosmic race) and Manuel Gamio (promoter of indigenismo) were instrumental
in building a Mexican national identity on the concept of mestizaje.

In 1810, towards the end of the Colonial era, the population of Mexico was
estimated to be about 6 million (based on the 1793 Revillagigedo Census and the
1803 estimate by geographer Alexander Humboldt and 1810 estimate by royal
accountant Francisco Navarro y Noriega). From these population estimates,
anthropologist Gonzalo Aguirre Beltrán approximated the following in regards to
race and ethnicity: there were some 15,000 peninsulares (expelled after
independence), less than 10,000 Africans (mostly enslaved, legally freed in
1829), more than a million "Euromestizos" (criollos and individuals of primarily
European descent, such as castizos), some 700,000 "Indomestizos" (individuals of
significant indigenous descent), some 600,000 "Afromestizos" (individuals of
significant African descent, such as mulatos) and some 3.7 million indigenous
peoples. Mexico does not ask about race in its census in part because it
eliminated the legal basis of the Colonial caste system (based on race and
birth) after independence.

A large majority of Mexicans have been classified as "Mestizos" (between 50% to
67% according to the Encyclopædia Britannica). In modern Mexico, the term
mestizo is primarily a cultural identity rather than the racial identity it was
during the colonial era, resulting in individuals with varying phenotypes being
classified under the same identity. The term is not in wide use in Mexican
society, although often used in literature about Mexican social identities.
Since the term carries a variety of socio-cultural, economic, racial and
biological meanings, it was deemed too imprecise to be used for ethnic
classification and was abandoned in Mexican censuses. Various genetic studies
have found that Mexico's population is not uniform in its genetic composition,
with there being significant regional variation. According to the country's
Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica, on average mestizos of primarily
European ancestry predominate in the north while mestizos from the southern
region have predominately indigenous ancestry. Mestizos from the center of the
country have a more even contribution from Europeans and Natives, while the
highest African contribution was found in the southwest and Veracruz. In the
Yucatán peninsula the word Mestizo is even used about Maya-speaking populations
living in traditional communities, because during the Caste War of the late 19th
century those Maya who did not join the rebellion were classified as mestizos.
In Chiapas the word "Ladino" is used instead of mestizo.

Estimates of the number of European-descended whites range from 10% to 20%
according to the Encyclopædia Britannica. The numbers very since the criteria to
define mestizo might be different from study to study and in Mexico some number
of white people have been historically classified as mestizos since the Mexican
government defined ethnicity on cultural standards as opposed to racial ones.
During the colonial and independent era, most of the European migration into
Mexico was Spanish. However, in the 19th and 20th centuries a substantial number
of non-Spanish Europeans immigrated to the country. However, at its height, the
total immigrant population in Mexico never exceeded two percent of the total.
Some of these immigrants, along with non-European immigrants, were forced out of
the country as a result of the Mexican Revolution. Mexico's northern regions
have the greatest European population and admixture. According to the last
racial census Mexico took, which was in 1921, there were no states in Mexico
that had a majority "white" population, and in virtually every state in the
north Mestizos were the largest population group. The only state where "whites"
outnumbered Mestizos was Sonora, in which "whites" composed 41.85% of the
population, and Mestizos 40.38%.

The absolute indigenous population of Mexico (26,694,928 individuals as of
2015[update]) is growing, but at a slower rate than the rest of the population
so that the percentage of indigenous peoples in regards to total population is
nonetheless falling. The majority of the indigenous population is concentrated
in the central and southern states, primarily in rural areas. Some indigenous
communities have a degree of autonomy under the legislation of "usos y
costumbres", which allows them to regulate some internal issues under customary
law. According to the National Commission for the Development of Indigenous
Peoples, the states with the greatest proportion of indigenous residents are:
Yucatán at 59%, Quintana Roo 39% and Campeche 27%, chiefly Maya; Oaxaca with 48%
of the population, the most numerous groups being the Mixtec and Zapotec
peoples; Chiapas at 28%, the majority being Tzeltal and Tzotzil Maya; Hidalgo
24%, the majority being Otomi; Puebla 19%, and Guerrero 17%, mostly Nahua
peoples and the states of San Luis Potosí and Veracruz both home to a population
that is 15% indigenous, mostly from the Totonac, Nahua and Teenek (Huastec)
groups. All of the indices of social development for the indigenous population
are considerably lower than the national average. In all states indigenous
people have higher infant mortality, in some states almost double of the
non-indigenous populations. Literacy rates are also much lower, with 27% of
indigenous children between 6 and 14 being illiterate compared to a national
average of 12%. The indigenous population participate in the workforce longer
than the national average, starting earlier and continuing longer. However, 55%
of the indigenous population receive less than a minimum salary, compared to 20%
for the national average. Many practice subsistence agriculture and receive no
salaries. Indigenous people also have less access to health care and a lower
quality of housing.

The Afro-Mexican population (1,381,853 individuals as of 2015[update]) is an
ethnic group made up of descendants of Colonial-era slaves and recent immigrants
of sub-Saharan African descent. Mexico had an active slave trade during the
colonial period and some 200,000 Africans were taken there, primarily in the
17th century. The creation of a national Mexican identity, especially after the
Mexican Revolution, emphasized Mexico's indigenous and European past; it
passively eliminated the African ancestors and contributions. Most of the
African-descended population was absorbed into the surrounding Mestizo (mixed
European/indigenous) and indigenous populations through unions among the groups.
Evidence of this long history of intermarriage with Mestizo and indigenous
Mexicans is also expressed in the fact that in the 2015 inter-census, 64.9%
(896,829) of Afro-Mexicans also identified as indigenous. It was also reported
that 9.3% of Afro-Mexicans speak an indigenous language. The states with the
highest self-report of Afro-Mexicans were Guerrero (6.5% of the population),
Oaxaca (4.95%) and Veracruz (3.28%). Afro-Mexican culture is strongest in the
communities of the Costa Chica of Oaxaca and Costa Chica of Guerrero.

Smaller ethnic groups in Mexico include South and East Asians, present since the
colonial era. During the colonial era Asians were termed Chino (regardless of
ethnicity), and arrived as merchants, artisans and slaves. The largest group
were Filipinos and some 200,000 Mexicans can trace Filipino ancestry. Modern
Asian immigration began in the late 19th century and at one point in the early
20th century, the Chinese were the second largest immigrant group. During the
early 20th century, a substantial number of Arabs (mostly Christians) began
arriving from the crumbling Ottoman Empire. The largest group were the Lebanese
and an estimated 400,000 Mexicans have some Lebanese ancestry.

The country has the largest Spanish-speaking population in the world with almost
a third of all Spanish native speakers.

Almost all of the Mexican population speaks Spanish, 99.3% according to the
latest census; nonetheless around 5.4% still speaks an indigenous language
besides Spanish. The indigenous languages with the most speakers are Nahuatl,
spoken by approximately 1.45 million people, Yukatek Maya spoken by some 750,000
people and the Mixtec and Zapotec languages, each spoken by more than 400,000
people.

The National Institute of Indigenous Languages INALI recognizes 68 linguistic
groups and some 364 different specific varieties of indigenous languages. Since
the promulgation of the Law of Indigenous Linguistic Rights in 2003, these
languages have had status as national languages, with equal validity with
Spanish in all the areas and contexts in which they are spoken.

In addition to the indigenous languages, other minority languages are spoken by
immigrant populations, such as the 80,000 German-speaking Mennonites in Mexico,
and 5,000 speakers of the Chipilo dialect of the Venetian language spoken in
Chipilo, Puebla.

The 2010 census by the Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Geografía (National
Institute of Statistics and Geography) gave Roman Catholicism as the main
religion, with 83% of the population, while 10% (10,924,103) belong to other
Christian denominations, including Evangelicals (5%); Pentecostals (1.6%); other
Protestant or Reformed (0.7%); Jehovah's Witnesses (1.4%); Seventh-day
Adventists (0.6%); and members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints (0.3%). 172,891 (or less than 0.2% of the total) belonged to other,
non-Christian religions; 4.7% declared having no religion; 2.7% were
unspecified.

The 92,924,489 Catholics of Mexico constitute in absolute terms the second
largest Catholic community in the world, after Brazil's. 47% percent of them
attend church services weekly. The feast day of Our Lady of Guadalupe, the
patron saint of Mexico, is celebrated on December 12 and is regarded by many
Mexicans as the most important religious holiday of their country.

The 2010 census reported 314,932 members of The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints, though the church in 2009 claimed to have over one million
registered members. About 25% of registered members attend a weekly sacrament
service although this can fluctuate up and down.

The presence of Jews in Mexico dates back to 1521, when Hernán Cortés conquered
the Aztecs, accompanied by several Conversos. According to the 2010 census,
there are 67,476 Jews in Mexico. Islam in Mexico is practiced by a small
population in the city of Torreón, Coahuila, and there are an estimated 300
Muslims in the San Cristóbal de las Casas area in Chiapas. In the 2010 census
18,185 Mexicans reported belonging to an Eastern religion, a category which
includes a tiny Buddhist population.

Until the twentieth century, Mexico was an overwhelmingly rural country, with
rural women's status defined within the context of the family and local
community. With urbanization beginning in the sixteenth century, following the
Spanish conquest of the Aztec empire, cities have provided economic and social
opportunities not possible within rural villages. Roman Catholicism in Mexico
has shaped societal attitudes about women's social role, emphasizing the role of
women as nurturers of the family, with the Virgin Mary as a model. Marianismo
has been an ideal, with women's role as being within the family under the
authority of men. In the twentieth century, Mexican women made great strides
toward toward a more equal legal and social status. In 1953, women in Mexico
were granted the vote in national elections.

Mexican women face discrimination and at times harassment from the machismo
population. Although women in Mexico are making big advancements they are faced
with the traditional expectations of being the head of the household. Researcher
Margarita Valdés noted that while there are few inequalities enforced by law or
policy in Mexico, there are gender inequalities perpetuated by social structures
and Mexican cultural expectations that limit the capabilities of Mexican women.

As of 2014[update], Mexico has the 16th highest rate of homicides committed
against women in the world The prevalence of domestic violence against women in
Mexican marital relationships varies at between 30 and 60 percent of
relationships. The remains of the victims were frequently mutilated. According
to a 1997 study, domestic abuse in Mexican culture "is embedded in gender and
marital relations fostered in Mexican women's dependence on their spouses for
subsistence and for self-esteem, sustained by ideologies of romantic love, by
family structure and residential arrangements." The perpetrators are often the
boyfriend, father-in-law, ex-husbands or husbands but only 1.6% of the murder
cases led to an arrest and sentencing.

Mexican culture reflects the complexity of the country's history through the
blending of indigenous cultures and the culture of Spain, imparted during
Spain's 300-year colonization of Mexico. Exogenous cultural elements have been
incorporated into Mexican culture as time has passed.

The Porfirian era (el Porfiriato), in the last quarter of the 19th century and
the first decade of the 20th century, was marked by economic progress and peace.
After four decades of civil unrest and war, Mexico saw the development of
philosophy and the arts, promoted by President Díaz himself. Since that time, as
accentuated during the Mexican Revolution, cultural identity has had its
foundation in the mestizaje, of which the indigenous (i.e. Amerindian) element
is the core. In light of the various ethnicities that formed the Mexican people,
José Vasconcelos in his publication La Raza Cósmica (The Cosmic Race) (1925)
defined Mexico to be the melting pot of all races (thus extending the definition
of the mestizo) not only biologically but culturally as well.

Mexican literature has its antecedents in the literatures of the indigenous
settlements of Mesoamerica. The most well known prehispanic poet is
Nezahualcoyotl. Modern Mexican literature was influenced by the concepts of the
Spanish colonialization of Mesoamerica. Outstanding colonial writers and poets
include Juan Ruiz de Alarcón and Juana Inés de la Cruz.

Other writers include Alfonso Reyes, José Joaquín Fernández de Lizardi, Ignacio
Manuel Altamirano, Carlos Fuentes, Octavio Paz (Nobel Laureate), Renato Leduc,
Carlos Monsiváis, Elena Poniatowska, Mariano Azuela ("Los de abajo") and Juan
Rulfo ("Pedro Páramo"). Bruno Traven wrote "Canasta de cuentos mexicanos"
(Mexican tales basket), "El tesoro de la Sierra Madre" (Treasure of the Sierra
Madre).

Post-revolutionary art in Mexico had its expression in the works of renowned
artists such as David Alfaro Siqueiros, Federico Cantú Garza, Frida Kahlo, Juan
O'Gorman, José Clemente Orozco, Diego Rivera, and Rufino Tamayo. Diego Rivera,
the most well-known figure of Mexican muralism, painted the Man at the
Crossroads at the Rockefeller Center in New York City, a huge mural that was
destroyed the next year because of the inclusion of a portrait of Russian
communist leader Lenin. Some of Rivera's murals are displayed at the Mexican
National Palace and the Palace of Fine Arts.

Mesoamerican architecture is mostly noted for its pyramids which are the largest
such structures outside of Ancient Egypt.[citation needed] Spanish Colonial
architecture is marked by the contrast between the simple, solid construction
demanded by the new environment and the Baroque ornamentation exported from
Spain.[citation needed] Mexico, as the center of New Spain has some of the most
renowned buildings built in this style.

Mexican films from the Golden Age in the 1940s and 1950s are the greatest
examples of Latin American cinema, with a huge industry comparable to the
Hollywood of those years. Mexican films were exported and exhibited in all of
Latin America and Europe. Maria Candelaria (1943) by Emilio Fernández, was one
of the first films awarded a Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival in 1946, the
first time the event was held after World War II. The famous Spanish-born
director Luis Buñuel realized in Mexico, between 1947 and 1965 some of him
master pieces like Los Olvidados (1949) and Viridiana (1961). Famous actors and
actresses from this period include María Félix, Pedro Infante, Dolores del Río,
Jorge Negrete and the comedian Cantinflas.

More recently, films such as Como agua para chocolate (1992), Cronos (1993), Y
tu mamá también (2001), and Pan's Labyrinth (2006) have been successful in
creating universal stories about contemporary subjects, and were internationally
recognized, as in the prestigious Cannes Film Festival. Mexican directors
Alejandro González Iñárritu (Amores perros, Babel, Birdman, The Revenant),
Alfonso Cuarón (Children of Men, Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban,
Gravity), Guillermo del Toro, Carlos Carrera (The Crime of Father Amaro),
screenwriter Guillermo Arriaga and photographer Emmanuel Lubezki are some of the
most known present-day film makers.

Some Mexican actors have achieved recognition as Hollywood stars. These include
Ramon Novarro, Dolores del Río, Lupe Vélez, Gilbert Roland, Anthony Quinn, Katy
Jurado, Ricardo Montalbán and Salma Hayek

There are two major television companies in Mexico that own the four primary
networks that broadcast to 75% of the population. They are Televisa, which owns
the Canal de las Estrellas and Canal 5 networks, and TV Azteca, which owns the
Azteca 7 and Azteca Trece networks. Televisa is also the largest producer of
Spanish-language content in the world and also the world's largest
Spanish-language media network. Grupo Multimedios is another media conglomerate
with Spanish-language broadcasting in Mexico, Spain, and the United States. The
telenovelas are very traditional in Mexico and are translated to many languages
and seen all over the world with renowned names like Verónica Castro, Lucía
Méndez and Thalía.

Mexican society enjoys a vast array of music genres, showing the diversity of
Mexican culture. Traditional music includes mariachi, banda, norteño, ranchera
and corridos; on an everyday basis most Mexicans listen to contemporary music
such as pop, rock, etc. in both English and Spanish. Mexico has the largest
media industry in Latin America, producing Mexican artists who are famous in
Central and South America and parts of Europe, especially Spain.

Some well-known Mexican singers are Thalía, Luis Miguel, Juan Gabriel, Alejandro
Fernández, Julieta Venegas, Gloria Trevi and Paulina Rubio. Mexican singers of
traditional music are: Lila Downs, Susana Harp, Jaramar, GEO Meneses and
Alejandra Robles. Popular groups are Café Tacuba, Caifanes, Molotov and Maná,
among others. Since the early years of the 2000s (decade), Mexican rock has seen
widespread growth both domestically and internationally.[citation needed]

According to the Sistema Nacional de Fomento Musical, there are between 120 and
140 youth orchestras affiliated to this federal agency from all federal
states.[citation needed] Some states, through their state agencies in charge of
culture and the arts—Ministry or Secretary or Institute or Council of Culture,
or in some cases the Secretary of Education or the State University—sponsor the
activities of a professional symphony orchestra or philharmonic crchestra so all
citizens can have access to this artistic expression from the field of classical
music. Mexico City is the most intense hub of this activity, hosting 12
professional orchestras sponsored by different agencies such as the National
Institute of Fine Arts, the Secretary of Culture of the Federal District, The
National University, the National Polytechnic Institute, a Delegación Política
(Coyoacán) and private ventures.[citation needed]

The conquistadores eventually combined their imported diet of rice, beef, pork,
chicken, wine, garlic and onions with the native pre-Columbian food, including
maize, tomato, vanilla, avocado, guava, papaya, pineapple, chili pepper, beans,
squash, sweet potato, peanut, and turkey.

Mexican food varies by region, because of local climate and geography and ethnic
differences among the indigenous inhabitants and because these different
populations were influenced by the Spaniards in varying degrees. The north of
Mexico is known for its beef, goat and ostrich production and meat dishes, in
particular the well-known Arrachera cut.

Central Mexico's cuisine is largely made up of influences from the rest of the
country, but also has its authentics, such as barbacoa, pozole, menudo, tamales,
and carnitas.

Southeastern Mexico, on the other hand, is known for its spicy vegetable and
chicken-based dishes. The cuisine of Southeastern Mexico also has quite a bit of
Caribbean influence, given its geographical location. Veal is common in the
Yucatan. Seafood is commonly prepared in the states that border the Pacific
Ocean or the Gulf of Mexico, the latter having a famous reputation for its fish
dishes, in particular à la veracruzana.

In modern times, other cuisines of the world have become very popular in Mexico,
thus adopting a Mexican fusion. For example, sushi in Mexico is often made with
a variety of sauces based on mango or tamarind, and very often served with
serrano-chili-blended soy sauce, or complemented with vinegar, habanero and
chipotle peppers

The most internationally recognized dishes include chocolate, tacos,
quesadillas, enchiladas, burritos, tamales and mole among others. Regional
dishes include mole poblano, chiles en nogada and chalupas from Puebla; cabrito
and machaca from Monterrey, cochinita pibil from Yucatán, Tlayudas from Oaxaca,
as well as barbacoa, chilaquiles, milanesas, and many others.

Mexico City hosted the XIX Olympic Games in 1968, making it the first Latin
American city to do so. The country has also hosted the FIFA World Cup twice, in
1970 and 1986.

Mexico's most popular sport is association football. It is commonly believed
that football was introduced in Mexico by Cornish miners at the end of the 19th
century. By 1902 a five-team league had emerged with a strong British influence.
Mexico's top clubs are América with 12 championships, Guadalajara with 11, and
Toluca with 10. Antonio Carbajal was the first player to appear in five World
Cups, and Hugo Sánchez was named best CONCACAF player of the 20th century by
IFFHS.

The Mexican professional baseball league is named the Liga Mexicana de Beisbol.
While usually not as strong as the United States, the Caribbean countries and
Japan, Mexico has nonetheless achieved several international baseball
titles.[citation needed] Mexican teams have won the Caribbean Series nine times.
Mexico has had several players signed by Major League teams, the most famous of
them being Dodgers pitcher Fernando Valenzuela.

In 2013, Mexico's basketball team won the Americas Basketball Championship and
qualified for the 2014 Basketball World Cup where it reached the playoffs.
Because of these achievements the country earned the hosting rights for the 2015
FIBA Americas Championship.

Bullfighting is a popular sport in the country, and almost all large cities have
bullrings. Plaza México in Mexico City, is the largest bullring in the world,
which seats 55,000 people. Professional wrestling (or Lucha libre in Spanish) is
a major crowd draw with national promotions such as AAA, LLL, CMLL and others.

Mexico is an international power in professional boxing (at the amateur level,
several Olympic boxing medals have also been won by Mexico). Vicente Saldivar,
Rubén Olivares, Salvador Sánchez, Julio César Chávez, Ricardo Lopez and Erik
Morales are but a few Mexican fighters who have been ranked among the best of
all time.

Notable Mexican athletes include golfer Lorena Ochoa, who was ranked first in
the LPGA world rankings prior to her retirement, Ana Guevara, former world
champion of the 400 metres (1,300 ft) and Olympic subchampion in Athens 2004,
Fernando Platas, four-time Olympic medal winning diver, and taekwondo fighter
María Espinoza, most decorated Mexican female Olympian.

Since the early 1990s, Mexico entered a transitional stage in the health of its
population and some indicators such as mortality patterns are identical to those
found in highly developed countries like Germany or Japan. Mexico's medical
infrastructure is highly rated for the most part and is usually excellent in
major cities, but rural communities still lack equipment for advanced medical
procedures, forcing patients in those locations to travel to the closest urban
areas to get specialized medical care. Social determinants of health can be used
to evaluate the state of health in Mexico.

State-funded institutions such as Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS) and
the Institute for Social Security and Services for State Workers (ISSSTE) play a
major role in health and social security. Private health services are also very
important and account for 13% of all medical units in the country.

Medical training is done mostly at public universities with much specializations
done in vocational or internship settings. Some public universities in Mexico,
such as the University of Guadalajara, have signed agreements with the U.S. to
receive and train American students in Medicine. Health care costs in private
institutions and prescription drugs in Mexico are on average lower than that of
its North American economic partners.

In 2004, the literacy rate was at 97% for youth under the age of 14 and 91% for
people over 15, placing Mexico at the 24th place in the world rank according to
UNESCO.

The National Autonomous University of Mexico ranks 190th place in the Top 200
World University Ranking published by The Times Higher Education Supplement in
2009. Private business schools also stand out in international rankings. IPADE
and EGADE, the business schools of Universidad Panamericana and of Monterrey
Institute of Technology and Higher Education respectively, were ranked in the
top 10 in a survey conducted by The Wall Street Journal among recruiters outside
the United States.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kim_Kardashian

Kimberly Kardashian West (born Kimberly Noel Kardashian; October 21, 1980) is an
American reality television personality, socialite, actress, businesswoman and
model. Kardashian first gained media attention as a friend and stylist of Paris
Hilton, but received wider notice after a 2003 sex tape with her former
boyfriend Ray J was leaked in 2007. Later that year, she and her family began to
appear in the E!'s reality television series Keeping Up with the Kardashians.
Its success soon led to the creation of spin-offs including Kourtney and Kim
Take New York and Kourtney and Khloé Take Miami in addition to various business
ventures. Kardashian's personal life soon became subject to widespread media
attention.

In recent years, Kardashian has grown an influential online and social media
presence, including tens of millions of followers on Twitter and Instagram. As
of 2016, she is one of the top ten most-followed celebrities on Instagram. She
has released a variety of products tied to her name, including the successful
2014 mobile game Kim Kardashian: Hollywood, a variety of clothing and products,
and the 2015 photo book Selfish. Her relationship with rapper Kanye West, dubbed
"Kimye" by the media, has also received significant coverage; the couple married
in 2014 and they have two children together.

Time magazine included Kardashian on their list of 2015's 100 most influential
people, while Vogue described her in 2016 as a "pop culture phenomenon." Critics
and admirers have described her as exemplifying the notion of being famous for
being famous. She was reported to be the highest-paid reality television
personality of 2015, with her total earnings exceeding US$53 million.

Kardashian was born on October 21, 1980 in Los Angeles, California, to parents
Robert and Kris (née Houghton). She has an older sister Kourtney, a younger
sister Khloé, and a younger brother Rob. Their mother is of Dutch, English,
Irish and Scottish ancestry, while their father was a third-generation Armenian
American. After their parents divorced in 1991, her mother married again that
year, to Caitlyn Jenner (then Bruce[A]), the 1976 Summer Olympics decathlon
winner. Through their marriage, Kardashian gained step-brothers Burton "Burt",
Brandon, and Brody; step-sister Casey; and half-sisters Kendall and Kylie
Jenner.

As a teenager, she attended Marymount High School, a Roman Catholic all-girls
school in Los Angeles. In 1994, her father represented football player O. J.
Simpson during his murder trial. Simpson is Kim Kardashian's godfather. Kim's
father died in 2003 of cancer. In her 20s, Kardashian was the close friend and
stylist of socialite Paris Hilton, through whom she first garnered media
attention.

In February 2007, a sex tape made by Kardashian and Ray J in 2003 was leaked.
Kardashian filed a lawsuit against Vivid Entertainment, who distributed the film
as Kim K Superstar. She later dropped the suit and settled for a reported
US$5 million.

In October 2007 Kardashian, in addition to her mother Kris Jenner, her
step-parent Caitlyn Jenner (then known as Bruce), her siblings Kourtney, Khloé,
and Rob Kardashian, and half-sisters Kendall and Kylie Jenner, began to appear
in the reality television series Keeping Up with the Kardashians. The series
proved successful for E!, and has led to the creations of spin-offs including
Kourtney and Kim Take New York and Kourtney and Kim Take Miami. In one of the
episode, Kim discussed an offer from Playboy to appear nude in the magazine.
That December, Kardashian posed for a nude pictorial for Playboy.

In 2008, she made her feature film debut in the disaster film spoof Disaster
Movie, in which she appeared as a character named Lisa. That same year, she was
a participant on season seven of Dancing with the Stars, where she was partnered
with Mark Ballas. Kardashian was the third contestant to be eliminated.

In January 2009, Kardashian made a cameo appearance during an episode of the
sitcom How I Met Your Mother, in the episode "Benefits". In April, she released
a workout DVD series through her television production company Kimsaprincess
Productions, LLC which has seen the release of three successful workout videos,
Fit in Your Jeans by Friday, with trainers Jennifer Galardi and Patrick Goudeau.
Kardashian played Elle in four episodes of the television series Beyond the
Break.

Kardashian become a guest host of WrestleMania XXIV and guest judge on America's
Next Top Model in August of that year. In September, Fusion Beauty and Seven Bar
Foundation launched "Kiss Away Poverty", with Kardashian as the face of the
campaign. For every LipFusion lipgloss sold, US$1 went to the Foundation to fund
women entrepreneurs in the US. The following month, she released her first
fragrance self-titled "Kim Kardashian". In December 2009, Kardashian made a
guest star appearance on CBS's CSI: NY with Vanessa Minnillo.

2010 saw Kardashian venture into several new endorsement deals, including
endorsing various food products for Carl's Jr. In January 2010, she starred as
Summa Eve in the film Deep in the Valley. In April, Kardashian sparked
controversy over the way she held a kitten for a photograph, holding it by the
scruff of its neck. With sisters Kourtney and Khloé, Kardashian is involved in
the retail and fashion industries. They have launched several clothing
collections and fragrances. Animal rights organization PETA criticized
Kardashian for repeatedly wearing fur coats, and named her as one of the five
worst people or organizations of 2010 when it came to animal welfare. June saw
Kardashian guest star with Khloé and Kourtney as themselves on the season three
premiere episode of the series 90210.

That same month, Kardashian was involved in a lawsuit against one of her
endorsements. Sanford Siegal, the creator of the Cookie Diet, sued Kardashian,
claiming she defamed him on Twitter. According to Siegal, Kardashian tweeted in
October 2009 that he was "falsely promoting" that she was on the cookie diet.
Siegal filed a claim in a Florida state court charging that her statements were
false and defamatory. He also alleged that Kardashian was on QuickTrim's payroll
when she posted the tweet. Kardashian's tweet appears to stem from an article on
CookieDiet.com, that named Kardashian as one of many celebrities who saw
positive results on the diet. Kardashian sent a cease-and-desist order to
Siegal, demanding the link be removed.

On July 1, 2010, the New York City branch of Madame Tussauds revealed a wax
figure of Kardashian. In November, Kardashian served as producer for The Spin
Crowd, a reality television show about Command PR, a New York City public
relations firm, run by Jonathan Cheban and Simon Huck. The show followed them as
they settle into their new offices in Los Angeles. That month, she also appeared
on season ten of The Apprentice. Kim, Kourtney, and Khloé wrote an autobiography
titled Kardashian Konfidential, which was released in stores on November 23, and
appeared on New York Times's Best Seller List.

In December 2010, Kardashian filmed a music video for a song titled "Jam (Turn
It Up)". The video was directed by Hype Williams; Kanye West makes a cameo in
the video. Kardashian premiered the song during a New Year's Eve party at TAO
Las Vegas on December 31, 2010. The song was produced by The-Dream and Tricky
Stewart. When asked if an album was in the works, Kardashian replied, "There's
no album in the works or anything—just one song we did for Kourtney and Kim Take
New York, and a video Hype Williams directed, half of the proceeds we're giving
away to a cancer foundation, because The-Dream's and one of my parents passed
away from cancer. It's just all having fun—with a good cause". Jim Farber,
writing for the Daily News, called the song a "dead-brained piece of generic
dance music, without a single distinguishing feature," and suggested that the
single made Kardashian the "worst singer in the reality TV universe."

That month, the International Business Times reported that Kardashian's 2010
earnings were the highest among Hollywood-based reality stars, estimating them
at $6 million.

In January 2011, Kardashian released her debut song "Jam (Turn It Up)", which
was produced by The-Dream. The music video for the single was directed by Hype
Williams. The single sold 14,000 downloads in five days and reached number one
on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 chart.

In April 2011, Kardashian released her third fragrance "Gold". Also in 2011, she
filed a $20 million lawsuit against Old Navy and its parent company, Gap Inc.
for right of publicity. Old Navy used actress/model Melissa Molinaro in their
Old Navy commercial featuring the actress singing and dancing. Kim Kardashian
claimed that Old Navy used Molinaro as a look alike to Kim in order to promote
their brand. Kim Kardashian was also seeking order to have the actress/model
Molinaro banned from Old Navy commercials. The lawsuit never went to trial but a
settlement was reached by use of a mediator in 2012; the exact settlement is
unknown.

In March 2012, Kardashian debuted her fourth fragrance, titled "True
Reflection", which she worked with the company Dress for Success to promote.
That month, Kardashian and her sisters were named in a $5 million class action
lawsuit against QuickTrim, the weight loss supplement they endorse. The
complaint, filed in the United States District Court for the Southern District
of New York, accuses the Kardashians (along with QuickTrim's manufacturer,
Windmill Health Products; the retailer GNC; and others in the sales and
marketing chain) of false and deceptive marketing of the diet aid. The
plaintiffs, hailing from several states, brought claims under their respective
states' consumer protection laws. In April, E! renewed Keeping Up with the
Kardashians for two additional seasons, in a deal reported to be worth $50
million. In October 2012, Kardashian released her fifth fragrance, "Glam", which
"draws on the glamour of her Hollywood lifestyle", and was made available
through Debenhams.

In summer of 2012, Kardashian and her family filmed a music video in the
Dominican Republic to Notorious B.I.G's song "Hypnotize".

Kardashian appeared on the cover, and in a pictorial in Paper's winter issue in
2014 photographed by Jean-Paul Goude. On the cover, her nude buttocks are
featured above the caption: "Break the Internet", which generated considerable
comment in both social and traditional media. The photos show Kardashian with
her hair tied up in a bun, wearing only a pearl necklace, a pair of earrings and
black satin gloves, and, on the cover, with her bare back facing the camera,
holding a sequined gown below her bare, oiled-up buttocks, while smiling broadly
at the camera. A Time magazine writer commented that, unlike previous
celebrities' nudes that represented the women's rebellion against repressed
society and "trying to tear down" barriers, Kardashian's exhibition was "just
provocation and bluster, repeated images that seem to offer us some sort of
truth or insight but are really just self serving. We want there to be something
more, some reason or context, some great explanation that tells us what it is
like to live in this very day and age, but there is not. Kim Kardashian's ass is
nothing but an empty promise." However, the stunt "set a new benchmark" in
social media response, and Paper's website received 15.9 million views in one
day, compared with 25,000 views on an average day.

Kardashian voiced the role of an alien in an episode of the adult animated
series American Dad!, in season 11 (2014–15) in the episode titled "Blagsnarst,
A Love Story" on September 21, 2014. In the episode, her character crash-lands
in the town of Langley Falls. The alien then develops an attraction to her
fellow alien Roger.

In June 2014, Kardashian released a mobile game for iPhone and Android called
Kim Kardashian: Hollywood. The objective of the game is to become a Hollywood
star or starlet. The game supports a free to play model, meaning the game is
free to download, but charges for in game-items. The game was a hit, earning
US$1.6 million in its first five days of release. In July, the game's developer
Glu Mobile announced that the game was the fifth highest earning game in Apple's
App Store.

In April 2015, Kardashian and West traveled to the Armenian Quarter of the Old
City in Jerusalem to have their daughter, North, baptized in the Armenian
Apostolic Church. The ceremony took place at the Cathedral of St. James. Khloe
Kardashian was appointed the godmother of North.

In May 2015, Kardashian released a portfolio book called 'Selfish', a 325-page
collection of self-taken photos of herself. In December 2015, Kardashian
released an emoji pack for IOS devices called Kimoji. The paid app quickly
became a top earner for Apple, becoming one of the top 5 most bought apps that
week.

Kardashian will make a cameo appearance in Ocean's Eight set for release on June
8, 2018.

Kardashian is one of the many celebrity turned entrepreneurs who are able to
leverage their television success by launching profitable side businesses.
Kardashian is the founder of the television production company, Kimsaprincess
Productions LLC which produces workout DVDs, launched an eponymous fragrance
line and the e-commerce shoe shopping website, ShoeDazzle. With her sisters
Kourtney and Khloe, she also owns and is expanding D-A-S-H clothing boutiques,
designed a clothing line for Bebe and nabbed diet (Quick Trim) and skincare
(PerfectSkin) products endorsements.

In 2006, Kardashian entered the business world with her two sisters and opened
the boutique shop D-A-S-H in Calabasas, California. In 2007, Kardashian and
three partners Brian Lee, Robert Shapiro and MJ Eng founded ShoeDazzle, an
online shoe and accessories website. The site now boasts more than 3 million
customers, who pay a monthly fee for access to a personalized selection of
shoes, jewelry and handbags every month. The site also landed a $40-million
investment from the venture capital firm Andreessen Horowitz. The company is
valued at $280 million as of 2012. In March 2009, she launched an endorsement
with her company, ShoeDazzle shopping, of which she is the co-founder and chief
fashion stylist. She then endorsed multiple other projects including a vanilla
cupcake mix flavor called 'Va-Va-Va-Nilla' for the bakery, Famous Cupcakes.

Beginning in early 2010, Kardashian and her sisters designed and developed
clothing lines for Bebe stores and 'Virgins, Saints, and Angels'. In April 2010,
Kardashian and her sisters released a sunless tanner "Kardashian Glamour Tan",
that month. In October 2011, Kardashian and her sisters opened their Kardashian
Khaos store in Las Vegas. In November 2012, Kardashian and her sisters
internationally launched the 'Kardashian Kollection' in England, as well as
launching a line of cosmetics, 'Khroma Beauty'.

In 2000, 19-year-old Kardashian eloped with music producer Damon Thomas. Thomas
filed for divorce in 2003. Kardashian later credited their separation to
physical and emotional abuse on his part. Prior to the completion of her
divorce, Kardashian began dating singer Ray J.

In May 2011, Kardashian became engaged to NBA player Kris Humphries, then of the
New Jersey Nets, whom she had been dating since October 2010. They were married
in a wedding ceremony on August 20 in Montecito, California. Earlier that month,
she had released her "wedding fragrance" called "Kim Kardashian Love" which
coincided with her own wedding. A two-part TV special showing the preparations
and the wedding itself aired on E! in early October 2011, amidst what The
Washington Post called a "media blitz" related to the wedding. After 72 days of
marriage, she filed for divorce from Humphries on October 31, citing
irreconcilable differences. Several news outlets surmised that Kardashian's
marriage to Humphries was merely a publicity stunt, to promote the Kardashian
family's brand and their subsequent television ventures. A man professing to be
her former publicist, Jonathan Jaxson, also claimed that her short-lived wedding
was indeed staged and a ploy to generate money. Kardashian filed suit against
Jaxson, saying his claims were untrue, and subsequently settled the case which
included an apology from Jaxson. A widely circulated petition asking to remove
all Kardashian-related programming from the air followed the split. The divorce
was subject to widespread media attention.

Kardashian began dating American rapper and longtime friend Kanye West in April
2012, while still legally married to Humphries. Her divorce was finalized on
June 3, 2013, while Kardashian gave birth to her first child with West, daughter
North West, on June 15, 2013. Kardashian and West became engaged on October 21,
Kardashian's 33rd birthday, and married on May 24, 2014 at Fort di Belvedere in
Florence, Italy. Her wedding dress was designed by Riccardo Tisci of Givenchy
with some guests' dresses designed by designer Michael Costello. Kardashian gave
birth to her second child, son Saint West, on December 5, 2015. The couple's
high status and respective careers have resulted in their relationship becoming
subject to heavy media coverage; The New York Times referred to their marriage
as "a historic blizzard of celebrity."

On October 2, 2016, while attending Paris Fashion Week, Kardashian was robbed at
gunpoint in the apartment where she was staying. Five individuals, dressed as
police officers, bound and gagged her, then stole $10 million worth of jewelry.
The thieves got in her residence by threatening the concierge. Once they
accessed Kardashian's room, they held a gun to her head, tying her wrists and
legs and wrapping duct tape around her mouth as a gag. Kardashian, who was
placed in the bathtub, was physically unharmed and reportedly begged for her
life. She managed to wriggle her hands free from the plastic ties around her
wrists and scream for help. The thieves escaped. On October 6, 2016, it was
revealed that filming for the next season of Keeping up with the Kardashians had
been placed "on hold indefinitely" after the robbery. Production resumed on
October 26. Kardashian postponed a makeup demonstration in Dubai due to the
incident.

As of May 2014, Kardashian was estimated to be worth US$45 million. In 2015,
Forbes reported she had "made more this year than ever as her earnings nearly
doubled to $53 million from 2014's $28 million," and reported that she "has
monetized fame better than any other." Much of her income include wholesale
earnings of the Sears line, the Kardashian Kollection, which raked in $600
million in 2013 and the Kardashian Beauty cosmetics line, Kardashian-branded
tanning products, the boutique-line DASH, as well as sponsored Instagram and
Twitter posts which are collectively worth $10,000-25,000 per post.

Kardashian has expressed pride in her Armenian and Scottish ancestry, although
she is not a citizen of either country and cannot speak Armenian. She has
advocated for the recognition of the Armenian Genocide on numerous occasions,
and encouraged President Barack Obama and the United States government to
consider its acknowledgement.

In April 2015, she traveled to Armenia with her husband, her sister Khloé and
her daughter North and visited the memorial of the victims in Yerevan. In April
2016, Kardashian wrote an article on her website condemning The Wall Street
Journal for running an advertisement denying the Armenian Genocide. During an
interview with GQ for the July 2016 issue, Kardashian described herself as a
Liberal Republican, fiscally conservative but socially progressive.

A ^ Jenner changed her name to Caitlyn due to gender transition in 2015. B ^
Shared with Kourtney, Khloe, Rob and Kris C ^ Shared with Kourtney, Khloe, Rob
and Kris D ^ Shared with Kourtney, Khloe, Rob and Kris E ^ With Kourtney, Khloe,
Rob, Kris, Kendall, Kylie and Caitlyn (then Bruce)



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greenland

Greenland (/ˈɡriːnlənd/; Greenlandic: Kalaallit Nunaat [kaˈlaːɬit ˈnunaːt];
Danish: Grønland [ˈɡ̊ʁɶnˌlanˀ]) is an autonomous constituent country within the
Danish Realm between the Arctic and Atlantic Oceans, east of the Canadian Arctic
Archipelago. Though physiographically a part of the continent of North America,
Greenland has been politically and culturally associated with Europe
(specifically Norway and Denmark, the colonial powers, as well as the nearby
island of Iceland) for more than a millennium. The majority of its residents are
Inuit, whose ancestors began migrating from the Canadian mainland in the 13th
century, gradually settling across the island.

Greenland is the world's largest island (it is smaller than Australia, which is
considered a continent). Three-quarters of Greenland is covered by the only
permanent ice sheet outside Antarctica. With a population of about 56,480
(2013), it is the least densely populated country in the world. The Arctic Umiaq
Line ferry acts as a lifeline for western Greenland, connecting the various
cities and settlements.

Greenland has been inhabited off and on for at least the last 4,500 years by
Arctic peoples whose forebears migrated there from what is now Canada. Norsemen
settled the uninhabited southern part of Greenland beginning in the 10th
century, and Inuit peoples arrived in the 13th century. The Norse colonies
disappeared in the late 15th century. Soon after their demise, beginning in
1499, the Portuguese briefly explored and claimed the island, naming it Terra do
Lavrador (later applied to Labrador in Canada). In the early 18th century,
Scandinavian explorers reached Greenland again. To strengthen trading and power,
Denmark-Norway affirmed sovereignty over the island.

Denmark–Norway claimed Greenland for centuries. Greenland was settled by Vikings
(of Norwegian origin) more than a thousand years ago, who had previously settled
Iceland to escape persecution from the King of Norway and his central
government. Vikings set sail from Greenland and Iceland, discovering North
America nearly 500 years before Columbus reached Caribbean islands. They
attempted to colonize land. Though under continuous influence of Norway and
Norwegians, Greenland was not formally under the Norwegian crown until 1262. The
Kingdom of Norway was extensive and a military power until the mid-14th century.
Norway was dramatically hit with a larger death toll than Denmark by the Black
Death, forcing Norway to accept a union in which the central government,
university and other fundamental institutions were located in Copenhagen. Thus,
the two kingdoms' resources were directed at creating Copenhagen. Norway became
the weaker part and lost sovereignty over Greenland in 1814 when the union was
dissolved. Greenland became a Danish colony in 1814, and was made a part of the
Danish Realm in 1953 under the Constitution of Denmark.

In 1973, Greenland joined the European Economic Community with Denmark. However,
in a referendum in 1982, a majority of the population voted for Greenland to
withdraw from the EEC which was effected in 1985. Greenland contains the world's
largest and most northernly national park, Northeast Greenland National Park
(Kalaallit Nunaanni nuna eqqissisimatitaq). Established in 1974 and expanded to
its present size in 1988, it protects 972,001 square kilometres (375,292 sq mi)
of the interior and northeastern coast of Greenland and is bigger than all but
twenty-nine countries in the world. Greenland is divided into four
municipalities - Sermersooq, Kujalleq, Qaasuitsup, and Qeqqata.

In 1979, Denmark had granted home rule to Greenland, and in 2008, Greenlanders
voted in favour of the Self-Government Act, which transferred more power from
the Danish royal government to the local Greenlandic government. Under the new
structure, in effect since 21 June 2009, Greenland can gradually assume
responsibility for policing, judicial system, company law, accounting, and
auditing; mineral resource activities; aviation; law of legal capacity, family
law and succession law; aliens and border controls; the working environment; and
financial regulation and supervision, while the Danish government retains
control of foreign affairs and defence. It also retains control of monetary
policy, providing an initial annual subsidy of DKK 3.4 billion, which is planned
to diminish gradually over time. Greenland expects to grow its economy based on
increased income from the extraction of natural resources. The capital, Nuuk,
held the 2016 Arctic Winter Games. Greenland leads the world in renewable
energy. 70% of its energy is from renewable sources, particularly hydropower.

The early Viking settlers named the island as Greenland. In the Icelandic sagas,
the Norwegian-born Icelander Erik the Red was said to be exiled from Iceland for
manslaughter. Along with his extended family and his thralls, he set out in
ships to explore an icy land known to lie to the northwest. After finding a
habitable area and settling there, he named it Grœnland (translated as
"Greenland"), supposedly in the hope that the pleasant name would attract
settlers.

The name of the country in Greenlandic (Kalaallisut) is Kalaallit Nunaat ("land
of the Kalaallit"). The Kalaallit are the indigenous Greenlandic Inuit people
who inhabit the country's western region.

In prehistoric times, Greenland was home to several successive Paleo-Eskimo
cultures known today primarily through archaeological finds. The earliest entry
of the Paleo-Eskimo into Greenland is thought to have occurred about 2500 BC.
From around 2500 BC to 800 BC, southern and western Greenland were inhabited by
the Saqqaq culture. Most finds of Saqqaq-period archaeological remains have been
around Disko Bay, including the site of Saqqaq, after which the culture is
named.

From 2400 BC to 1300 BC, the Independence I culture existed in northern
Greenland. It was a part of the Arctic small tool tradition. Towns, including
Deltaterrasserne, started to appear.

Around 800 BC, the Saqqaq culture disappeared and the Early Dorset culture
emerged in western Greenland and the Independence II culture in northern
Greenland. The Dorset culture was the first culture to extend throughout the
Greenlandic coastal areas, both on the west and east coasts. It lasted until the
total onset of the Thule culture in 1500 AD. The Dorset culture population lived
primarily from hunting of whales and caribou.

From 986, Greenland's west coast was settled by Icelanders and Norwegians,
through a contingent of 14 boats led by Erik the Red. They formed three
settlements—known as the Eastern Settlement, the Western Settlement and the
Middle Settlement—on fjords near the southwestern-most tip of the island. They
shared the island with the late Dorset culture inhabitants who occupied the
northern and western parts, and later with the Thule culture that entered from
the north. Norse Greenlanders submitted to Norwegian rule in the 13th century
under the Norwegian Empire. Later the Kingdom of Norway entered into a personal
union with Denmark in 1380, and from 1397 was a part of the Kalmar Union.

The Norse settlements, such as Brattahlíð, thrived for centuries but disappeared
sometime in the 15th century, perhaps at the onset of the Little Ice Age. Apart
from some runic inscriptions, no contemporary records or historiography survives
from the Norse settlements. Medieval Norwegian sagas and historical works
mention Greenland's economy as well as the bishops of Gardar and the collection
of tithes. A chapter in the Konungs skuggsjá (The King's Mirror) describes Norse
Greenland's exports and imports as well as grain cultivation.

Icelandic saga accounts of life in Greenland were composed in the 13th century
and later, and do not constitute primary sources for the history of early Norse
Greenland. Modern understanding therefore mostly depends on the physical data
from archeological sites. Interpretation of ice core and clam shell data
suggests that between 800 and 1300, the regions around the fjords of southern
Greenland experienced a relatively mild climate several degrees Celsius higher
than usual in the North Atlantic, with trees and herbaceous plants growing, and
livestock being farmed. Barley was grown as a crop up to the 70th parallel. What
is verifiable is that the ice cores indicate Greenland has had dramatic
temperature shifts many times over the past 100,000 years. Similarly the
Icelandic Book of Settlements records famines during the winters, in which "the
old and helpless were killed and thrown over cliffs".

These Icelandic settlements vanished during the 14th and early 15th centuries.
The demise of the Western Settlement coincides with a decrease in summer and
winter temperatures. A study of North Atlantic seasonal temperature variability
showed a significant decrease in maximum summer temperatures beginning in the
late 13th century to early 14th century—as much as 6 to 8 °C (11 to 14 °F) lower
than modern summer temperatures. The study also found that the lowest winter
temperatures of the last 2000 years occurred in the late 14th century and early
15th century. The Eastern Settlement was likely abandoned in the early to
mid-15th century, during this cold period.

Theories drawn from archeological excavations at Herjolfsnes in the 1920s,
suggest that the condition of human bones from this period indicates that the
Norse population was malnourished, maybe due to soil erosion resulting from the
Norsemen's destruction of natural vegetation in the course of farming,
turf-cutting, and wood-cutting. Malnutrition may also have resulted from
widespread deaths due to pandemic plague; the decline in temperatures during the
Little Ice Age; and armed conflicts with the Inuit. However, recent
archeological studies somewhat challenge the general assumption that the Norse
colonisation had a dramatic negative environmental effect on the vegetation.
Data support traces of a possible Norse soil amendment strategy. More recent
evidence suggests that the Norse, who never numbered more than about 2,500,
gradually abandoned the Greenland settlements over the 1400s as walrus ivory,
the most valuable export from Greenland, decreased in price due to competition
with other sources of higher-quality ivory, and that there was actually little
evidence of starvation or difficulties.

The Thule people are the ancestors of the current Greenlandic population. No
genes from the Paleo-Eskimos have been found in the present population of
Greenland. The Thule Culture migrated eastward from what is now known as Alaska
around 1000, reaching Greenland around 1300. The Thule culture was the first to
introduce to Greenland such technological innovations as dog sleds and toggling
harpoons.

In 1500, King Manuel I of Portugal sent Gaspar Corte-Real to Greenland in search
of a Northwest Passage to Asia which, according to the Treaty of Tordesillas,
was part of Portugal's sphere of influence. In 1501, Corte-Real returned with
his brother, Miguel Corte-Real. Finding the sea frozen, they headed south and
arrived in Labrador and Newfoundland. Upon the brothers' return to Portugal, the
cartographic information supplied by Corte-Real was incorporated into a new map
of the world which was presented to Ercole I d'Este, Duke of Ferrara, by Alberto
Cantino in 1502. The Cantino planisphere, made in Lisbon, accurately depicts the
southern coastline of Greenland.

In 1605–1607, King Christian IV of Denmark sent a series of expeditions to
Greenland and Arctic waterways to locate the lost eastern Norse settlement and
assert Danish sovereignty over Greenland. The expeditions were mostly
unsuccessful, partly due to leaders who lacked experience with the difficult
arctic ice and weather conditions, and partly because the expedition leaders
were given instructions to search for the Eastern Settlement on the east coast
of Greenland just north of Cape Farewell, which is almost inaccessible due to
southward drifting ice. The pilot on all three trips was English explorer James
Hall.

After the Norse settlements died off, the area came under the de facto control
of various Inuit groups, but the Danish government never forgot or relinquished
the claims to Greenland that it had inherited from the Norse. When it
re-established contact with Greenland in the early 18th century, Denmark
asserted its sovereignty over the island. In 1721, a joint mercantile and
clerical expedition led by Danish-Norwegian missionary Hans Egede was sent to
Greenland, not knowing whether a Norse civilization remained there. This
expedition is part of the Dano-Norwegian colonization of the Americas. After
15 years in Greenland, Hans Egede left his son Paul Egede in charge of the
mission there and returned to Denmark, where he established a Greenland
Seminary. This new colony was centred at Godthåb ("Good Hope") on the southwest
coast. Gradually, Greenland was opened up to Danish merchants, and closed to
those from other countries.

When the union between the crowns of Denmark and Norway was dissolved in 1814,
the Treaty of Kiel severed Norway's former colonies and left them under the
control of the Danish monarch. Norway occupied then-uninhabited eastern
Greenland as Erik the Red's Land in July 1931, claiming that it constituted
terra nullius. Norway and Denmark agreed to submit the matter in 1933 to the
Permanent Court of International Justice, which decided against Norway.

Greenland's connection to Denmark was severed on 9 April 1940, early in World
War II, after Denmark was occupied by Nazi Germany. On 8 April 1941, the United
States occupied Greenland to defend it against a possible invasion by Germany.
The United States occupation of Greenland continued until 1945. Greenland was
able to buy goods from the United States and Canada by selling cryolite from the
mine at Ivittuut. The major air bases were Bluie West-1 at Narsarsuaq and Bluie
West-8 at Søndre Strømfjord (Kangerlussuaq), both of which are still used as
Greenland's major international airports. Bluie was the military code name for
Greenland.

During this war, the system of government changed: Governor Eske Brun ruled the
island under a law of 1925 that allowed governors to take control under extreme
circumstances; Governor Aksel Svane was transferred to the United States to lead
the commission to supply Greenland. The Danish Sirius Patrol guarded the
northeastern shores of Greenland in 1942 using dogsleds. They detected several
German weather stations and alerted American troops, who destroyed the
facilities. After the collapse of the Third Reich, Albert Speer briefly
considered escaping in a small aeroplane to hide out in Greenland, but changed
his mind and decided to surrender to the United States Armed Forces.

Greenland had been a protected and very isolated society until 1940. The Danish
government had maintained a strict monopoly of Greenlandic trade, allowing only
small scale troaking with Scottish whalers. In wartime Greenland developed a
sense of self-reliance through self-government and independent communication
with the outside world. Despite this change, in 1946 a commission including the
highest Greenlandic council, the Landsrådene, recommended patience and no
radical reform of the system. Two years later, the first step towards a change
of government was initiated when a grand commission was established. A final
report (G-50) was presented in 1950: Greenland was to be a modern welfare state
with Denmark as sponsor and example. In 1953 Greenland was made an equal part of
the Danish Kingdom. Home rule was granted in 1979.

Following World War II, the United States developed a geopolitical interest in
Greenland, and in 1946 the United States offered to buy the island from Denmark
for $100,000,000. Denmark refused to sell it. In the 21st century, the United
States, according to Wikileaks, remains highly interested in investing in the
resource base of Greenland and in tapping hydrocarbons off the Greenlandic
coast.

In 1950 Denmark agreed to allow the US to reestablish Thule Air Base in
Greenland; it was greatly expanded between 1951 and 1953 as part of a unified
NATO Cold War defense strategy. The local population of three nearby villages
was moved more than 100 kilometres (62 mi) away in the winter. The United States
tried to construct a subterranean network of secret nuclear missile launch sites
in the Greenlandic ice cap, named Project Iceworm. It managed this project from
Camp Century from 1960 to 1966 before abandoning it as unworkable. The Danish
government did not become aware of the program's mission until 1997, when they
discovered it while looking for records related to the crash of a
nuclear-equipped B-52 bomber at Thule in 1968.

With the 1953 Danish constitution, Greenland's colonial status ended as the
island was incorporated into the Danish realm as an amt (county). Danish
citizenship was extended to Greenlanders. Danish policies toward Greenland
consisted of a strategy of cultural assimilation—or de-Greenlandification.
During this period, the Danish government promoted the exclusive use of the
Danish language in official matters, and required Greenlanders to go to Denmark
for their post-secondary education. Many Greenlandic children grew up in
boarding schools in southern Denmark, and a number lost their cultural ties to
Greenland. While the policies "succeeded" in the sense of shifting Greenlanders
from being primarily subsistence hunters into being urbanized wage earners, the
Greenlandic elite began to reassert a Greenlandic cultural identity. A movement
developed in favour of independence, reaching its peak in the 1970s. As a
consequence of political complications in relation to Denmark's entry into the
European Common Market in 1972, Denmark began to seek a different status for
Greenland, resulting in the Home Rule Act of 1979.

This gave Greenland limited autonomy with its own legislature taking control of
some internal policies, while the Parliament of Denmark maintained full control
of external policies, security, and natural resources. The law came into effect
on 1 May 1979. The Queen of Denmark, Margrethe II, remains Greenland's Head of
state. In 1985, Greenland left the European Economic Community (EEC) upon
achieving self-rule, as it did not agree with the EEC's commercial fishing
regulations and an EEC ban on seal skin products. Greenland voters approved a
referendum on greater autonomy on 25 November 2008.

On 21 June 2009, Greenland gained self-rule with provisions for assuming
responsibility for self-government of judicial affairs, policing, and natural
resources. Also, Greenlanders were recognized as a separate people under
international law. Denmark maintains control of foreign affairs and defence
matters. Denmark upholds the annual block grant of 3.2 billion Danish kroner,
but as Greenland begins to collect revenues of its natural resources, the grant
will gradually be diminished. This is generally considered to be a step toward
eventual full independence from Denmark. Greenlandic was declared the sole
official language of Greenland at the historic ceremony.

Greenland is the world's largest non-continental island and the third largest
country in North America. It lies between latitudes 59° and 83°N, and longitudes
11° and 74°W. The Atlantic Ocean borders Greenland's southeast; the Greenland
Sea is to the east; the Arctic Ocean is to the north; and Baffin Bay is to the
west. The nearest countries are Canada, to the west and southwest across Baffin
Bay, and Iceland, east of Greenland in the Atlantic Ocean. Greenland also
contains the world's largest national park, and it is the largest dependent
territory by area in the world.

The average daily temperature of Nuuk, Greenland varies over the seasons from −8
to 7 °C (18 to 45 °F). The total area of Greenland is 2,166,086 km2
(836,330 sq mi) (including other offshore minor islands), of which the Greenland
ice sheet covers 1,755,637 km2 (677,855 sq mi) (81%) and has a volume of
approximately 2,850,000 km3 (680,000 cu mi). The highest point on Greenland is
Gunnbjørn Fjeld at 3,700 m (12,139 ft) of the Watkins Range (East Greenland
mountain range). The majority of Greenland, however, is less than 1,500 m
(4,921 ft) in elevation.

The weight of the ice sheet has depressed the central land area to form a basin
lying more than 300 m (984 ft) below sea level, while elevations rise suddenly
and steeply near the coast. The ice flows generally to the coast from the centre
of the island. A survey led by French scientist Paul-Emile Victor in 1951
concluded that, under the ice sheet, Greenland is composed of three large
islands. This is disputed, but if it is so, they would be separated by narrow
straits, reaching the sea at Ilulissat Icefjord, at Greenland's Grand Canyon and
south of Nordostrundingen.

All towns and settlements of Greenland are situated along the ice-free coast,
with the population being concentrated along the west coast. The northeastern
part of Greenland is not part of any municipality, but it is the site of the
world's largest national park, Northeast Greenland National Park.

At least four scientific expedition stations and camps had been established on
the ice sheet in the ice-covered central part of Greenland (indicated as pale
blue in the map to the right): Eismitte, North Ice, North GRIP Camp and The
Raven Skiway. Currently, there is a year-round station, Summit Camp, on the ice
sheet, established in 1989. The radio station Jørgen Brønlund Fjord was, until
1950, the northernmost permanent outpost in the world.

The extreme north of Greenland, Peary Land, is not covered by an ice sheet,
because the air there is too dry to produce snow, which is essential in the
production and maintenance of an ice sheet. If the Greenland ice sheet were to
melt away completely, the world's sea level would rise by more than 7 m (23 ft).

Between 1989 and 1993, US and European climate researchers drilled into the
summit of Greenland's ice sheet, obtaining a pair of 3 km (1.9 mi) long ice
cores. Analysis of the layering and chemical composition of the cores has
provided a revolutionary new record of climate change in the Northern Hemisphere
going back about 100,000 years, and illustrated that the world's weather and
temperature have often shifted rapidly from one seemingly stable state to
another, with worldwide consequences. The glaciers of Greenland are also
contributing to a rise in the global sea level at a faster rate than was
previously believed. Between 1991 and 2004, monitoring of the weather at one
location (Swiss Camp) showed that the average winter temperature had risen
almost 6 °C (11 °F). Other research has shown that higher snowfalls from the
North Atlantic oscillation caused the interior of the ice cap to thicken by an
average of 6 cm or 2.36 in/yr between 1994 and 2005. However, a recent study
suggests a much warmer planet in relatively recent geological times:

In 2003, a small island, 35 by 15 metres (115 by 49 feet) in length and width,
was discovered by arctic explorer Dennis Schmitt and his team at the coordinates
of 83-42. Whether this island is permanent is not confirmed as of yet. If it is,
it is the northernmost permanent known land on earth.

In 2007 the existence of a new island was announced. Named "Uunartoq Qeqertaq"
(English: Warming Island), this island has always been present off the coast of
Greenland, but was covered by a glacier. This glacier was discovered in 2002 to
be shrinking rapidly, and by 2007 had completely melted away, leaving the
exposed island. The island was named Place of the Year by the Oxford Atlas of
the World in 2007. Ben Keene, the atlas's editor, commented: "In the last two or
three decades, global warming has reduced the size of glaciers throughout the
Arctic and earlier this year, news sources confirmed what climate scientists
already knew: water, not rock, lay beneath this ice bridge on the east coast of
Greenland. More islets are likely to appear as the sheet of frozen water
covering the world's largest island continues to melt".

Some controversy surrounds the history of the island, specifically over whether
the island might have been revealed during a brief warm period in Greenland
during the mid-20th century.

The 1310 m-high Qaqugdluit-mountain-land on the south-side of the peninsula
Nugssuaq, situated 50 kilometres (31 miles) west of the Greenland inland ice at
70° 7’50.92"N 51°44’30.52"W, is exemplary of the numerous mountain areas of
West-Greenland. Up to the year 1979 (Stage 0) it shows Historical to Holocene,
i.e. Postglacial glacier stages dating back at least 7000 and at most c. 10 000
years. In 1979 the glacier tongues came to an end – according to the extent and
height of the glacier nourishing area – between 660 and 140 metres (2,170 and
460 feet) above sea level. The pertinent climatic glacier- snowline (ELA) ran at
c. 800 metres (2,600 feet) in height. The snowline of the oldest (VII) of the
three Holocene glacier stages (V – VII) ran c. 230 metres (750 feet) deeper,
i.e. at c. 570 metres (1,870 feet) in height. The four youngest glacier stages
(IV-I) are of a Historical age. They have to be classified as belonging to the
global glacier advances in the years 1811 to 1850 and 1880 to 1900 ("Little Ice
Age"), 1910 to 1930, 1948 and 1953. Their snowlines rose step by step up to the
level of 1979. The current snowline (Stage 0) runs nearly unchanged. During the
oldest Postglacial Stage VII an ice-stream-network from valley glaciers joining
each other, has completely covered the landscape. Its nourishing areas consisted
of high-lying plateau-glaciers and local ice caps. Due to the uplift of the
snowline about that c. 230 metres (750 feet) – what corresponds to a warming
about c. 1.5 °C (2.7 °F), since 1979 there exists a plateau-glaciation with
small glacier tongues hanging down on the margins that nearly did not reach the
main valley bottoms any more.

There are approximately 700 known species of insects in Greenland, which is low
compared with other countries (over one million species have been described
worldwide). The sea is rich in fish and invertebrates, especially in the milder
West Greenland Current, and a large part of the Greenland fauna associated with
marine production, including large colonies of seabirds. The few native land
mammals in Greenland include the polar bear, arctic fox, reindeer, arctic hare,
musk ox, collared lemming, ermine, and arctic wolf. The last four are found
naturally only in East Greenland, having immigrated from Ellesmere Island. There
are dozens of species of seals and whales along the coast. Land fauna consists
predominantly of animals that have spread from North America or for a lot of
birds and insects coming from Europe. There are no native or free-living
reptiles or amphibians on the island.

Phytogeographically, Greenland belongs to the Arctic province of the
Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom. The island is sparsely populated
in vegetation; plant life consists mainly of grassland and small bushes, which
is regularly grazed by livestock. The most common tree native to Greenland is
the European white birch (Betula pubescens) along with gray-leaf willow (Salix
glauca), rowans (Sorbus aucuparia), common junipers (Juniperus communis) and
other smaller trees, mainly willows.

Greenland's flora comprises about 500 species of higher plants, i.e. flowering
plants, ferns, horsetails and lycopodiophyta. Of the other groups, the lichens
are the largest with about 950 species; of major fungal species are known
600–700; mosses and algae anything less. Most of Greenland's higher plants are
widespread, particularly in arctic and alpine regions, and only a dozen species
of particular saxifrage and hawkweed is endemic. A few species were introduced
by the Norsemen, such as cow vetch.

The animals of Greenland include the Greenland dog, which was introduced by the
Inuit, as well as European-introduced species such as Greenlandic sheep, goats,
cattle, reindeer, horse, chicken and sheepdog, all descendants of animals
imported by Europeans. Marine mammals include the hooded seal (Cystophora
cristata) as well as the grey seal (Halichoerus grypus). Whales frequently pass
very close to Greenlandic shores in the late summer and early autumn. Species
represented include the beluga whale, blue whale, Greenland whale, fin whale,
humpback whale, minke whale, narwhal, pilot whale, sperm whale.

Approximately 225 species of fish are known from the waters surrounding
Greenland, and the fishing industry is a major part of Greenland's economy,
accounting for approximately the majority of the country's total exports.

Birds, especially seabirds, are an important part of Greenland's animal life. On
steep mountainsides breed large colonies of auks, puffins, skuas, and
kittiwakes. By common ducks include eiders, long-tailed ducks and the king eider
and in West Greenland white-fronted goose and in East Greenland pink-footed
goose and barnacle goose. Breeding migratory birds are also including snow
bunting, lapland bunting, ringed plover, red-throated loon and red-necked
phalarope. Of land birds that are usually sedentary, can be highlighted arctic
redpoll, ptarmigan, short-eared owl, snowy owl, gyrfalcon and in West Greenland
the white-tailed eagle.

The Kingdom of Denmark is a constitutional monarchy, in which Queen Margrethe II
is the head of state. The monarch officially retains executive power and
presides over the Council of State (privy council). However, following the
introduction of a parliamentary system of government, the duties of the monarch
have since become strictly representative and ceremonial, such as the formal
appointment and dismissal of the Prime Minister and other ministers in the
executive government. The monarch is not answerable for his or her actions, and
the monarch's person is sacrosanct.

The party system is currently dominated by the social democratic Forward Party
(14 MPs), and the democratic socialist Inuit Community Party (11 MPs), both of
which broadly argue for greater independence from Denmark. While the 2009
election saw the unionist—and largely Danish—Democrat Party (2 MPs) decline
greatly, the 2013 election consolidated the power of the two main parties at the
expense of the smaller groups, and saw the far-left Inuit Party (2 MPs) elected
to the Parliament for the first time.

The non-binding 2008 referendum on self-governance favoured increased
self-governance 21,355 votes to 6,663.

In 1985, Greenland left the European Economic Community (EEC), unlike Denmark,
which remains a member. The EEC later became the European Union (EU, renamed and
expanded in scope in 1992). Greenland retains some ties with the EU via Denmark.
However, EU law largely does not apply to Greenland except in the area of trade.
Greenland is a member state of the Council of Europe.

Greenland's head of state is Margrethe II, Queen regnant of Denmark. The Queen's
government in Denmark appoints a High Commissioner (Rigsombudsmand) to represent
it on the island. The current commissioner is Mikaela Engell.

Greenlanders elect two representatives to the Folketing, Denmark's parliament,
out of a total of 179. The current representatives are Aleqa Hammond of the
Siumut Party and Aaja Chemnitz Larsen of the Inuit Community Party.

Greenland also has its own Parliament, which has 31 members. The government is
the Naalakkersuisut whose members are appointed by the Premier. The head of
government is the Premier, usually the leader of the majority party in
Parliament. The current Premier is Kim Kielsen of the Siumut Party.

Although it is largely unpopulated, Greenland abolished its three counties in
2009 and has since been divided into four territories known as "municipalities":
Sermersooq ("Much Ice") around the capital Nuuk; Kujalleq ("South") around Cape
Farewell; Qeqqata ("Centre") north of the capital along the Davis Strait; and
Qaasuitsup ("Darkness") in the northwest. The northeast of the island composes
the unincorporated Northeast Greenland National Park. Thule Air Base is also
unincorporated, an enclave within Qaasuitsup municipality administered by the
United States Air Force. During its construction, there were as many as 12,000
American residents but in recent years the number has been below 1,000.

The Greenlandic economy is highly dependent on fishing. Fishing accounts for
more than 90% of Greenland's exports. The shrimp and fish industry is by far the
largest income earner.

Greenland is abundant in minerals. Mining of ruby deposits began in 2007. Other
mineral prospects are improving as prices are increasing. These include iron,
uranium, aluminium, nickel, platinum, tungsten, titanium, and copper. Despite
resumption[when?] of several hydrocarbon and mineral exploration activities, it
will take several years before hydrocarbon production can materialize. The state
oil company Nunaoil was created to help develop the hydrocarbon industry in
Greenland. The state company Nunamineral has been launched on the Copenhagen
Stock Exchange to raise more capital to increase the production of gold, started
in 2007.

Electricity has traditionally been generated by oil or diesel power plants, even
if there is a large surplus of potential hydropower. Because of rising oil
prices, there is a programme to build hydro power plants. The first, and still
the largest, is Buksefjord hydroelectric power plant.

There are also plans to build a large aluminium smelter, using hydropower to
create an exportable product. It is expected that much of the labour needed will
be imported.

The European Union has urged Greenland to restrict People's Republic of China
development of rare-earth projects, as China accounts for 95 percent of the
world's current supply. In early 2013, the Greenland government said that it had
no plans to impose such restrictions.

Greenland suffered an economic contraction in the early 1990s. But, since 1993,
the economy has improved. The Greenland Home Rule Government (GHRG) has pursued
a tight fiscal policy since the late 1980s, which has helped create surpluses in
the public budget and low inflation. Since 1990, Greenland has registered a
foreign trade deficit following the closure of the last remaining lead and zinc
mine that year. More recently,[when?] new sources of ruby in Greenland have been
discovered, promising to bring new industry and a new export to the country.
(See Gemstone industry in Greenland).

About half of public spending on Greenland is funded by block grants from
Denmark which in 2007 totalled over 3.2 billion kr. Additional proceeds from the
sale of fishing licences and the annual compensation from the EU represents
280 million DKK per year. Greenland's economy is based on a narrow professional
basis with the fishing industry as the dominant sector with some 90% of its
exports. In a few years, quarrying and tourism could complement the fisheries
that depend on the changing prices of fish and fishing opportunities. The long
distances and lack of roads divides the domestic market into many small units
that have high operating costs. Most of the fish factories are owned by Royal
Greenland.

Air transportation exists both within Greenland and between the island and other
nations. There is also scheduled boat traffic, but the long distances lead to
long travel times and low frequency. There are no roads between cities because
the coast has many fjords that would require ferry service to connect a road
network.[citation needed] In addition, the lack of agriculture, forestry and
similar countryside activities has meant that very few countryside roads have
been built.

All civil aviation matters are handled by the Civil Aviation Administration
Denmark. Most airports including Nuuk Airport have short runways and can only be
served by special fairly small aircraft on fairly short flights. Kangerlussuaq
Airport around 100 kilometres (62 miles) inland from the west coast is the major
airport of Greenland and the hub for domestic flights. Intercontinental flights
connect mainly to Copenhagen. Travel between international destinations (except
Iceland) and any city in Greenland requires a plane change.

Air Iceland operates flights from Reykjavík to a number of airports in
Greenland. Otherwise flights are handled by the domestic airline Air Greenland.

There are no flights directly to USA or Canada, although there have been flights
Kangerlussuaq – Baltimore, and Nuuk – Iqaluit., which were cancelled because of
too few passengers and financial losses. An alternative between Greenland and
USA/Canada is Air Iceland/Icelandair with a plane change in Iceland.

Sea passenger and freight transport is served by the coastal ferries operated by
Arctic Umiaq Line. It makes a single round trip per week, taking 80 hours each
direction.

Greenland has a population of 56,370 (January 2013 estimate), of whom 88% are
Greenlandic Inuit (including mixed persons). The remaining 12% are of European
descent, mainly Greenland Danes. Several thousand Greenlandic Inuit reside in
Denmark proper. The majority of the population is Lutheran. Nearly all
Greenlanders live along the fjords in the south-west of the main island, which
has a relatively mild climate. More than 17,000 people reside in Nuuk, the
capital city.

Both Greenlandic and Danish have been used in public affairs since the
establishment of home rule in 1979; the majority of the population can speak
both languages. Kalaallisut (Greenlandic) became the sole official language in
June 2009. In practice, Danish is still widely used in the administration and in
higher education, as well as remaining the first or only language for some
Danish immigrants in Nuuk and other larger towns. A debate about the role of
Kalaallisut (Greenlandic) and Danish in the future society is ongoing. The
orthography of Kalaallisut (Greenlandic) was established in 1851 and revised in
1973, and the country has a 100% literacy rate.

A majority of the population speaks Kalaallisut (West Greenlandic), most of them
bilingually. It is spoken by about 50,000 people, making it the most populous of
the Eskimo–Aleut language family, spoken by more people than all the other
languages of the family combined.

Kalaallisut (West Greenlandic), is the Inuit dialect of West Greenland, which
has long been the most populous area of the island. This has led to its de facto
status as the official "Greenlandic" language, although the northern dialect
Inuktun remains spoken by 1,000 or so people around Qaanaaq and the eastern
dialect Tunumiisut by around 3,000. Each of these dialects is almost
unintelligible to the speakers of the other, and are considered by some
linguists to be separate languages.[citation needed] A UNESCO report has
labelled the other dialects as endangered and measures are now being considered
to protect the East Greenlandic dialects.

English is another important language for Greenland, taught in schools from the
first school year.

The nomadic Inuit people were traditionally shamanistic, with a well-developed
mythology primarily concerned with appeasing a vengeful and fingerless sea
goddess who controlled the success of the seal and whale hunts.

The first Norse colonists were pagan, but Erik the Red's son Leif was converted
to Christianity by King Olaf Trygvesson on a trip to Norway in 999 and sent
missionaries back to Greenland. These swiftly established sixteen parishes, some
monasteries, and a bishopric at Garðar.

Rediscovering these colonists and spreading ideas of the Protestant Reformation
among them was one of the primary reasons for the Danish recolonization in the
18th century. Under the patronage of the Royal Mission College in Copenhagen,
Norwegian and Danish Lutherans and German Moravian missionaries searched for the
missing Norse settlements, but no Norse were found, and instead they began
preaching to the Inuit. The principal figures in the Christianization of
Greenland were Hans and Poul Egede and Matthias Stach. The New Testament was
translated piecemeal from the time of the very first settlement on Kangeq
Island, but the first translation of the whole Bible was not completed until
1900. An improved translation using the modern orthography was completed in
2000.

Today, the major religion is Protestant Christianity, represented mainly by the
Church of Denmark, which is Lutheran in orientation. While there are no official
census data on religion in Greenland, the Bishop of Greenland Sofie Petersen
estimates that 85% of the Greenlandic population are members of her
congregation. The Church of Denmark is the established church through the
Constitution of Denmark:

This applies to all of the Kingdom of Denmark, except for the Faroe Islands, as
the Church of the Faroe Islands became independent in 2007.

The Roman Catholic minority is pastorally served by the Roman Catholic Diocese
of Copenhagen. There are still Christian missionaries on the island, but mainly
from charismatic movements proselytizing fellow Christians.

The rate of suicide in Greenland is very high. According to a 2010 census,
Greenland holds the highest suicide rate in the world. Other significant social
issues faced by Greenland are high rates of unemployment, alcoholism and
HIV/AIDS. Alcohol consumption rates in Greenland reached their height in the
1980s when it was twice as high as in Denmark, and had by 2010 fallen slightly
below the average level of consumption in Denmark (which is the twelfth highest
in the world). But at the same time alcohol prices are much higher, meaning that
consumption has a high social impact.

There is a 10-year compulsory schooling for children. Secondary education is
available in several places in the country. There are many higher schools in
Greenland, including the University of Greenland in Nuuk. Traditionally many
Greenlanders have received higher education in Denmark.

Greenland's culture began with settlement in the second millennium BC by the
Dorset Culture, shortly after the end of the ice age.

In the 10th century, Icelandic and Norwegian Vikings settled in the southern
part of the island, while the Thule Inuit culture was introduced in the north of
the island and expanded southward.

Today Greenlandic culture is a blending of traditional Inuit (Kalaallit) and
Scandinavian culture. Inuit, or Kalaallit, culture has a strong artistic
tradition, dating back thousands of years. The Kalaallit are known for an art
form of figures called tupilak or a "spirit object." Traditional art-making
practices thrive in the Ammassalik. Sperm whale ivory remains a valued medium
for carving.

Greenland also has a successful, albeit small, music culture. Some popular
Greenlandic bands and artists include Sume (classic rock), Chilly Friday (rock),
Nanook (rock), Siissisoq (rock), Nuuk Posse (hip hop) and Rasmus Lyberth (folk),
who performed in the Danish Eurovision Song Contest 1979, performing in
Greenlandic. The singer-songwriter Simon Lynge is the first musical artist from
Greenland to have an album released across the United Kingdom, and to perform at
the UK's Glastonbury Festival. The music culture of Greenland also includes
traditional Inuit music, largely revolving around singing and drums.

Sports are an important part of Greenlandic culture, as the population is
generally quite active. The main traditional sport in Greenland is Arctic
sports, a form of wrestling thought to have originated in medieval times.

Popular sports include association football, track and field, handball and
skiing. Handball is often referred to as the national sport, and Greenland's
men's national team was ranked among the top 20 in the world in 2001.
Greenlandic women excel at football relative to the size of the country.

Greenland has excellent conditions for skiing, fishing, snowboarding, ice
climbing and rock climbing, although mountain climbing and hiking are preferred
by the general public. Although the country's environment is generally
ill-suited for golf, there are nevertheless golf courses in the island.
Greenland hosts a biennial international the world's largest multisport and
cultural event for young people of the Arctic for the second time in 2016.

Association football is the national sport of Greenland. The governing body, the
Football Association of Greenland (Kalaallit Nunaanni Arsaattartut Kattuffiat),
is not yet a member of FIFA because of ongoing disagreements with FIFA
leadership and an inability to grow grass for regulation grass pitches.[citation
needed] However, it is the 17th member of the N.F.-Board. The FIFA Goal
programme sponsored the Qaqortoq Stadium in Qaqortoq, which has an artificial
grass pitch.

The oldest sport association in Greenland is the Greenland Ski Federation (GIF),
founded in 1969. This happened when the then-President of the GIF Daniel
Switching took the initiative to found federations and institute reforms.
Greenland Ski Federation is further divided into Alpine and cross-country
selection committees. The federation is not a member of the International Ski
Federation (FIS), but Greenland skiers participated in the Olympics and World
Championships under the Danish flag at the 1968, 1994, 1998 and 2014 Games.

Greenland took part in the 2007 World Men's Handball Championship in Germany,
finishing 22nd in a field of 24 national teams.

Greenland competes in the biennial Island Games, as well as the biennial Arctic
Winter Games (AWG). In 2002, Nuuk hosted the AWG in conjunction with Iqaluit,
Nunavut. In 1994 and again in 2002, they won the Hodgson Trophy for fair play.



